The Project Gutenberg eBook of Newark College of Engineering
Bulletin, v. 11, No. 4, December 15, 1938, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Newark College of Engineering Bulletin, v. 11, No. 4, December
       15, 1938

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: March 24, 2022 [eBook #67696]

Language: English

Produced by: Juliet Sutherland, SF2001, and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NEWARK COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING
BULLETIN, V. 11, NO. 4, DECEMBER 15, 1938 ***





[Illustration: THE NEWARK COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING]




The
Newark College of Engineering
NEWARK, NEW JERSEY


[Illustration: COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING--NEWARK]

1939-1940


365-369 HIGH STREET
NEWARK, NEW JERSEY




COLLEGE CALENDARS[1]


                                              1939

 First Semester Classes End (Freshmen)  January         20

 Mid-year Examinations (Freshmen)       Jan. 23  -  Feb. 4

 First Semester Classes End
   (Sophomores, Juniors and Seniors)    January         27

 Mid-year Examinations
   (Sophomores, Juniors and Seniors)    Jan. 30  -  Feb. 4

 Second Semester Begins                 February         6

 Visitors’ Day                          February        11

 Lincoln’s Birthday                     February        13

 Washington’s Birthday                  February        22

 Good Friday                            April            7

 Spring Recess                          April        10-15

 Re-examinations                        April        10-15

 Memorial Day                           May             30

 Second Semester Classes End
   (Freshmen, Sophomores and Juniors)   June             2

 Final Examinations
   (Freshmen, Sophomores and Juniors)   June          5-10

 Second Semester Classes End
   (Seniors--No Final Examinations)     June             9

 Re-examinations                        September      5-9

 Entrance Examinations                  September      5-9

 Registration (Freshmen)              { September    11 to
                                      { Sept.   13 at noon

 Registration
   (Sophomores, Juniors and Seniors)    September    11-16

 College Opens                          September       18

 Thanksgiving Recess                  { Nov. 29 at noon to
                                      { Dec.  4 at 9 A. M.

 Christmas Recess                     { Dec. 22 at noon to
                                      { Jan.  2 at 9 A. M.

                                               1940

 First Semester Classes End (Freshmen)  January         19

 Mid-year Examinations (Freshmen)       Jan. 22  -  Feb. 3

 First Semester Classes End
   (Sophomores, Juniors and Seniors)    January         26

 Mid-year Examinations
   (Sophomores, Juniors and Seniors)    Jan. 29  -  Feb. 3

 Second Semester Begins                 February         5

 Visitors’ Day                          February        10

 Lincoln’s Birthday                     February        12

 Washington’s Birthday                  February        22

 Good Friday                            March           22

 Spring Recess                          April         8-13

 Re-examinations                        April         8-13

 Memorial Day                           May             30

 Second Semester Classes End
   (Freshmen, Sophomores and Juniors)   May             31

 Final Examinations
   (Freshmen, Sophomores and Juniors)   June           3-8

 Second Semester Classes End
   (Seniors--No Final Examinations)     June             7

 Re-examinations                        September      3-7

 Entrance Examinations                  September      3-7

 Registration (Freshmen)              { September     9 to
                                      { Sept.   11 at noon

 Registration
   (Sophomores, Juniors and Seniors)    September     9-14

 College Opens                          September       16

 Thanksgiving Recess                  { Nov. 27 at noon to
                                      { Dec.  1 at 9 A. M.

 Christmas Recess                     { December     23 to
                                      { Jan.  2 at 9 A. M.

[1] For calendars for individuals beginning the work of the Freshman
year in February 1939 or February 1940 see page 7.




ANNOUNCEMENT

=OPPORTUNITIES FOR STUDENTS TO BEGIN THE WORK OF THE FRESHMAN YEAR IN
FEBRUARY=


In order to meet a very real need the College has for the past several
years made it possible for a limited number of high school graduates to
begin the work of the Freshman year in February. Men entering at that
time may, if they so desire, continue the work of the Freshman year
during the Summer Session. Those who satisfactorily complete the work
of the Spring and Summer Sessions are then eligible for admission to
the Sophomore class the following September.

A man who enters in February, therefore, is able to graduate one
year earlier than would have been possible if he had waited until
the following September to enter. Freshmen continuing throughout the
Spring and Summer Sessions receive the same number of credit hours of
instruction as do those students who take the regular Freshman program
beginning in September. The number of class hours of attendance per
week for the February group is somewhat greater than the weekly total
for those entering in September. However, experience has shown that
the better student is able to complete the work of the Spring and
Summer Sessions satisfactorily without suffering any ill effects. As
the Summer Session ends about the middle of August, a vacation of
approximately one month is available between the closing of the Summer
Session and the beginning of classes in September.

High school students who wish to apply for admission to the February
sections should submit certificates of high school training immediately
after the December 1st preceding the February entrance as the
enrollment is definitely limited. These transcript and application
forms may be obtained upon request from the College Registrar. While
it is understood that a complete secondary school record will usually
not be available until the student’s graduation, the partial record
will serve for preliminary consideration of the application. The
final statement will be obtained by the College. All certificates of
high school training must be mailed directly to the Registrar by the
principals of the high schools.

Expenses for the February group are the same as for the September
matriculates.

Individuals desiring additional information may apply to the Registrar
for an appointment.




COLLEGE CALENDARS

 FEBRUARY ADMISSIONS
 to the
 FRESHMAN CLASS


                                          1939

 Entrance Examinations             Jan. 30  -  Feb. 1
 Registration for Spring Session   Jan. 30  -  Feb. 4
 Spring Session Begins             February         6
 Visitors’ Day                     February        11
 Lincoln’s Birthday                February        13
 Washington’s Birthday             February        22
 Good Friday                       April            7
 Spring Recess                     April        10-15
 Memorial Day                      May             30
 Spring Session Ends               June             2
 Examinations                      June          5-10
 Registration for Summer Session   June          5-10
 Summer Session Begins             June            12
 Independence Day                  July             4
 Summer Session Ends               August          18
 Re-examinations                   September      5-9

                                          1940

 Entrance Examinations             January      29-31
 Registration for Spring Session { January      29 to
                                 { January 31 at noon
 Spring Session Begins             February         5
 Visitors’ Day                     February        10
 Lincoln’s Birthday                February        12
 Washington’s Birthday             February        22
 Good Friday                       March           22
 Spring Recess                     April         8-13
 Memorial Day                      May             30
 Spring Session Ends               May             31
 Examinations                      June           3-8
 Registration for Summer Session   June           3-8
 Summer Session Begins             June            10
 Independence Day                  July             4
 Summer Session Ends               August          16
 Re-examinations                   September      3-7




[Illustration: Calendar Grid for 1939 and 1940]




 The
 Newark College of Engineering
 NEWARK, NEW JERSEY

Supported by the State and City


THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES

Appointed by the Governor

       *       *       *       *       *

EX-OFFICIO MEMBERS

 Hon. A. Harry Moore
 Governor of the State of New Jersey

 Hon. Meyer C. Ellenstein
 Mayor of the City of Newark

       *       *       *       *       *

APPOINTED MEMBERS

 William L. Morgan (1942)           _President_
 Frederick L. Eberhardt (1940)      _Vice-President_
 Robert Campbell (1941)             _Treasurer_
 Jos. M. Byrne, Jr. (1939)
 Cyrus H. Loutrel (1942)
 Thomas N. McCarter (1939)
 George W. McRae (1941)
 Edward F. Weston (1940)


=ADVISORY COMMITTEES TO THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES=


 _Civil Engineering_

 Howard T. Critchlow
 Edward S. Rankin
 J. Ralph Van Duyne


 _Electrical Engineering_

 Jacob Barron
 J. Walter Dietz
 Arthur W. Lunn
 Frederick O. Runyon


 _Industrial Chemistry and Chemical Engineering_

 Carleton Ellis
 W. Stuart Landes
 August Merz
 Harold W. Paine


 _Mechanical Engineering_

 Lillian M. Gilbreth
 Hervey S. Vassar
 Henry M. Crane
 Roy V. Wright


=FACULTY AND INSTRUCTING STAFF=

  Allan R. Cullimore, S. B. in Civil Engineering.
    _President._

  James C. Peet, E. E.
    _Professor in Electrical Engineering._
    _In Charge of Department._

  Harold N. Cummings, A. B., S. B. in Civil Engineering.
    _Professor in Civil Engineering._
    _In Charge of Department._

  V. T. Stewart, Ph. B., S. B. in Chemical Engineering.
    _Professor in Chemistry._
    _In Charge of Department._

  J. Ansel Brooks, Ph. B. in Mechanical Engineering, M. E.
    _Professor in Industrial Engineering._
    _In Charge of Department._

  Frank N. Entwisle, C. E.
    _Professor in Physics._
    _In Charge of Department._

  Bedross Koshkarian, A. B., A. M. in Pure and Applied Mathematics.
    _Professor in Theoretical and Applied Mechanics._
    _In Charge of Department._

  Albert A. Nims, B. S. in Electrical Engineering, E. E.
    _Professor in Electrical Engineering._

  Frank D. Carvin, B. S. in Mechanical Engineering, M. E., M. A.,
       Ph. D. in Physics.
    _Professor in Mechanical Engineering._
    _In Charge of Department._

  James H. Fithian, A. B., M. A. in Mathematics.
    _Professor in Mathematics._
    _In Charge of Department._

  Paul Miller Giesy, B. A., M. A., B. Sc. in Chemical Engineering,
       Ph. D. in Chemistry.
    _Associate Professor in Chemistry._
    _In Charge of Department of English._

  James A. Bradley, A. B., A. M. in Chemistry.
    _Associate Professor in Chemistry._

  William S. La Londe, Jr., S. B. in Civil Engineering, M. S.
    _Associate Professor in Civil Engineering._

  Eastman Smith, S. B., M. S., Sc. D. in Mechanical Engineering and
       Physics.
    _Associate Professor in Physics._

  Harold E. Walter, B. S. in Electro-Chemical Engineering, M. E.
    _Associate Professor in Mechanical Engineering._

  Robert Widdop, B. S. in Mechanical Engineering.
    _Associate Professor in Industrial Engineering._
    _Director of Industrial Relations._

  Henry H. Metzenheim, B. S. in Electrical Engineering, E. E.
    _Associate Professor._

  Paul E. Schweizer, M. E.
    _Assistant Professor in Mechanical Engineering._

  Frank E. McKone, B. S. in Electrical Engineering;
       M. S. in Aeronautical Engineering.
    _Assistant Professor in Electrical Engineering._

  Leslie C. Spry, B. S. in Pedagogy, M. Pd.
    _Assistant Professor in English._

  James Melvin Robbins, S. B., S. M. in Civil Engineering.
    _Assistant Professor in Civil Engineering._

  Paul C. Shedd, B. S. in Electrical Engineering.
    _Assistant Professor in Electrical Engineering._

  Solomon Fishman, B. S. in Electrical Engineering.
    _Assistant Professor in Electrical Engineering._

  Robert W. VanHouten, B. S. in Civil Engineering, C. E.
    _Assistant Professor in Civil Engineering._
    _In Charge of Summer Session._

  Edward G. Baker, A. B., M. A. in Mathematics.
    _Assistant Professor in Mathematics._

  David E. Davis, B. S., M. S.
    _Assistant Professor in Mechanical Engineering._

  Arthur S. Kohler, B. S. in Chemistry.
    _Assistant Professor in Chemistry._

  Joseph Joffe, A. B., B. S. in Engineering, M. A. in Physics,
       Ph. D. in Chemistry.
    _Assistant Professor in Mechanics and in Chemistry._

  George D. Wilkinson, Jr., B. S. in Mechanical Engineering, M. S.
    _Assistant Professor in Industrial Engineering._

  Odd P. L. Albert, B. S. in Civil Engineering, C. E., M. S.
    _Assistant Professor in Structural Engineering._

  Charles J. Kiernan, B. S. in Education.
    _Assistant Professor in Civil Engineering._

  Frank A. Grammer, A. B.
    _Assistant Professor in English._

  Francis J. Burns, B. S. in Mechanical Engineering.
    _Assistant Professor in Mechanical Engineering._

  Frederick W. Bauder, B. S. in Chemical Engineering.
    _Instructor in Chemistry._

  Clarence H. Stephans, B. S. in Electrical Engineering.
    _Instructor in Electrical Engineering._

  Thomas J. Tully, B. S. in Chemical Engineering.
    _Instructor in Chemistry._

  Elmer C. Easton, B. S. in Electrical Engineering, M. S.
    _Instructor in Mathematics._

  Paul O. Hoffmann, B. S. in Mechanical Engineering, A. M.
    _Instructor in Mechanics._

  David E. Zeliff, B. S. in Mechanical Engineering, M. A. in Science.
    _Instructor in Mechanical Engineering._

  Howard E. Purdy, M. E.
    _Instructor in Mechanical Engineering._

  Daniel C. Frost, B. C. E., C. E., M. Ed.
    _Instructor in Civil Engineering._

  George C. Keeffe, B. S. in Chemical Engineering, M. S.
    _Instructor in Chemistry._

  William Arnott, B. S. in Electrical Engineering.
    _Instructor in English._

  Michael Frederick, B. S. in Chemical Engineering, M. S.
    _Instructor in Chemistry._

  William Hazell, Jr., B. S. in Electrical Engineering.
    _Instructor in Physics._

  John C. Hoffman, B. S. in Electrical Engineering.
    _Instructor in Industrial Engineering._

  William Jordan, 3rd., B. S. in Electrical Engineering.
    _Instructor in Electrical Engineering._

  Kenneth A. MacFadyen, B. S. in Civil Engineering.
    _Instructor in Mechanical Engineering._

  Paul Nielsen, B. S., M. S. in Civil Engineering.
    _Instructor in Physics._

  Pompey Mainardi, B. S. in Civil Engineering.
    _Instructor in Mathematics._

  Edmund M. Squire, B. S. in Electrical Engineering.
    _Instructor in Mathematics._

  Arthur S. Williams, B. S., Ph. D. in Chemistry.
    _Instructor in Chemistry._

  P. L. Cambreleng, A. B. in Economics.
    _Instructor in Industrial Relations._

  August E. Zentgraf, B. S. in Civil Engineering.
    _Assistant Instructor._

  Frank A. Busse, B. S. in Civil Engineering.
    _Assistant Instructor._

  John W. Willard, B. S. in Mechanical Engineering.
    _Assistant in Industrial Relations._

  Benjamin Eskin, B. S. in Mechanical Engineering, Aero. E.
    _Assistant Instructor._

  August Reminger, Jr.
    _Assistant in Machine Shop._

  Oliver J. Sizelove, B. S. in Electrical Engineering.
    _Assistant Instructor._

  Douglas F. Oliver, B. S. in Electrical Engineering.
    _Assistant Instructor._

  Sidney Baum, B. S. in Chemical Engineering, S. M.
    _Assistant Instructor._

  Frederick C. Burt, Jr., B. S. in Chemical Engineering.
    _Assistant Instructor._

  Luigi Pollara, B. S. in Chemical Engineering.
    _Assistant Instructor._


SPECIAL LECTURERS

  Lillian M. Gilbreth, Ph. D., Sc. D., D. Eng.
    _Lecturer on Technics of Effectiveness for Engineers._

  Angelo M. Pisarra, Ch. E., LL. B.
    _Lecturer on Patent Law._

  Bruce B. Robinson, A. B., M. A., M. D.
    _Lecturer on Physical and Mental Hygiene._

  William A. Stickel, C. E.
    _Lecturer on Engineering in County Government._

  Roy V. Wright, M. E., D. Eng.
    _Lecturer on The Engineer as a Citizen._

         *       *       *       *       *

  Rossman I. Vail.
    _Advisor in Student Orientation._

  William R. Ward, Jr., A. B., M. D.
    _Consulting Physician._


DEPARTMENTAL ASSISTANTS

  Howard R. Booth, B. S. in Mechanical Engineering.
  William J. Hoffman, B. S. in Civil Engineering.
  James H. Johnston, B. S. in Electrical Engineering.
  Carl Konove, B. S. in Chemical Engineering.
  Jerome L. Polaner, B. S. in Mechanical Engineering.
  Frederick A. Russell, B. S. in Electrical Engineering.
  Sidney Sadoff, B. S. in Chemical Engineering.
  George A. Valente.
  Edward W. Wraith, Jr.


COMMITTEES OF THE FACULTY

1938-1939


Standing Committees


_Executive Committee_

  A. R. Cullimore, (ex-officio) Chairman
  F. D. Carvin
  H. N. Cummings
  J. C. Peet
  V. T. Stewart


_Committee on the Content and Integration of Professional Courses_

  F. D. Carvin, Chairman
  P. M. Giesy
  W. S. La Londe
  H. H. Metzenheim
  A. A. Nims


_Committee on Scholarship_

  J. A. Bradley, Chairman
  F. N. Entwisle
  J. H. Fithian
  P. M. Giesy
  J. C. Peet


_Committee on Laboratory Equipment and Facilities_

  H. N. Cummings, Chairman
  F. N. Entwisle
  J. C. Peet
  V. T. Stewart
  H. E. Walter


_Associate Members_

  T. J. Tully
  C. H. Stephans


_Committee on Discipline_

  A. A. Nims, Chairman
  E. G. Baker
  J. M. Robbins
  P. E. Schweizer


_Committee on Transfers for Graduate Work_

  J. C. Peet, Chairman
  F. D. Carvin
  H. N. Cummings
  H. H. Metzenheim
  V. T. Stewart


_Committee on Entrance Credentials_

  R. Widdop, Chairman
  J. A. Bradley
  F. A. Grammer
  Associate Member, P. L. Cambreleng


_Committee on Publications_

  J. A. Brooks, Chairman
  O. P. L. Albert
  F. J. Burns
  W. S. La Londe


_Committee on Publicity_

  L. C. Spry, Chairman
  F. N. Entwisle
  C. J. Kiernan
  S. Fishman
  J. C. Peet


_Committee on Schedule_

  R. W. Van Houten, Chairman
  J. A. Bradley
  F. D. Carvin
  A. A. Nims


_Committee on Student Relations_

  F. N. Entwisle, Chairman
  J. A. Bradley
  F. D. Carvin
  H. N. Cummings


_Committee on Social Affairs_

  A. S. Kohler, Permanent Chairman
  J. A. Bradley
  Three Class Advisers


OFFICERS OF ADMINISTRATION


  Allan R. Cullimore
  _President_

  James A. Bradley
  _Dean_

  Harold N. Cummings
  _Supervisor of Evening Sessions_

  L. C. Spry
  [2]_Secretary to the Faculty_

  H. H. Metzenheim      _Comptroller_
  R. W. Van Houten      _Assistant to the President_
  Lillian M. Scott      _Bursar_
  P. L. Cambreleng      _Registrar_
  Margaret A. Yatsko    _Recorder_
  C. H. Stephans        _Supt. of Buildings and Equipment_
  E. B. Berlinrut       _Director of Publicity_
  Gertrude C. Isaacs    _Secretary to the President_
  Edna Schneider        _Asst. to Sec’y of Faculty_
  Adele Garrison        _Asst. to Bursar_

[2] All communications to the Faculty should be addressed to the
Secretary.


COLLEGE LIBRARY


FACULTY COMMITTEE

  P. M. Giesy, Chairman
  J. Joffe
  J. M. Robbins
  G. D. Wilkinson


STAFF

  Katharine Maynard  _Consulting Librarian_
  P. M. Giesy        _Librarian_
  Ruth Littig        _Librarian in Charge of Circulation_
  Gladys E. Birkelo  _Cataloguer_
  Marion Page        _Assistant Librarian_
  C. P. Deutsch      _Assistant Librarian_

The Library of the College consists of approximately 21,000 volumes
of technical reference books and of engineering texts, together with
many volumes covering all branches of literature, and bound volumes of
the more important engineering periodicals. The College subscribes to
a considerable number of engineering periodicals and trade journals
which are available on the shelves of the library for student use. In
addition the College has an arrangement with the Newark Public Library
so that books may upon request be obtained from the city library for
reference and general use. The facilities of the Library of the Public
Service Corporation are also at the service of the College.

In 1936 Dr. Edward Weston bequeathed to the College his scientific
library of approximately 12,000 bound volumes and 65,000 pamphlets,
together with his collection of scientific and laboratory apparatus.
Arrangements are now in progress to provide adequate facilities for
making these collections available to the students and the public.




THE NEWARK COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING


The Newark College of Engineering instituted in 1919, is a development
of the Newark Technical School founded in 1881 by the Board of Trade
of Newark. The College is a public institution supported by both the
City and the State and is governed by a Board of Trustees appointed by
the Governor of the State of New Jersey. The Governor and the Mayor of
Newark are ex-officio members.

The control and supervision of finances of the College is vested in the
Board of Regents of the State of New Jersey.

The College is situated in the heart of Newark at High Street and
Summit Place. The work of the institution is carried on in four
buildings. The recitation halls are adequately equipped modern
structures, particularly suited to requirements of an engineering
college.

Located in the center of one of the most important industrial sections
in the world, the opportunities for direct contact with industry are
exceptionally good and co-operative relations have been established
with some of the largest and best industries in this section.




GENERAL INFORMATION


Industry is asking today for young men of character and initiative
who have been trained to leadership along the lines of commercial
production. Men are in great demand who can step into positions of more
or less influence and who can handle problems of manufacture as well
as problems of design. The work of the production engineer of today is
concerned with problems of labor and problems of money as well as with
problems having to do with materials.

The Administration of the College believes that success in the field of
engineering depends, today, upon certain fundamental factors which are
best taught in direct contact with modern industry. The factors are:

  (1) Character
  (2) Initiative
  (3) Hard work
  (4) Understanding human relations
  (5) A knowledge of fundamentals of applied science.

Early contact with the industries enables the student to get not only
his academic work but also to learn at first-hand some very important
and fundamental things about the operation of modern industry and about
the functions of the modern engineer.

Beginning in the year 1940-41 two full semesters of academic work
will be given to senior students. The co-operative work for students
affected by this arrangement will be increased and it will be given
during the summers following the Sophomore and Junior years. This work
will take the place of the alternating schedule now in effect for
seniors.

The summer cooperative work will have the same purpose as that
heretofore given in the Senior year. It will serve as an industrial
engineering laboratory where the men will work under commercial
conditions, commercial standards and commercial criteria. The work
given in industry under the supervision of the College will, however,
be limited to those men who have shown maturity, accomplishment, and
development in the first two years of their College work. It will be in
the nature of a premium given those men who are likely to profit from
it, along with other premiums in the way of scholarships, exemptions
from examinations, etc. extended to an Honors Option group. It will be
optional on the part of the student and limited by the College.

The college is particularly interested in the study of traits and
characteristics which in individual cases interfere with the student’s
development along industrial and professional lines. The student is
given, therefore, a considerable amount of individual study and
attention from this particular point of view.




COURSES


The College offers four-year courses in Industrial Chemistry, and
in Civil, Electrical and Mechanical Engineering, with an option in
Aeronautical Engineering.

Much of the subject matter in these four courses is common to all of
them. These common subjects represent the unity of the basic sciences
and techniques of all branches of engineering.

The hours of instruction extend from 9:00 A. M. to 5:00 P. M. Monday to
Friday inclusive.

Opportunity is offered to a limited number of high school graduates to
enter the College in February as freshmen. Students entering at that
time may continue the work of the freshman year throughout the summer.
Those who satisfactorily complete the work of the spring and summer
terms may be admitted to the sophomore class in September of the same
year.

Students other than those referred to in the above paragraph, who
are desirous of taking work during the summer, should inquire at the
College for information regarding courses to be given.




DEGREES


The Newark College of Engineering reports to and receives the right to
grant degrees from the New Jersey State Board of Education.

All candidates for graduation who satisfactorily complete a regular
course of study and the examinations required receive the degree
of Bachelor of Science (B.S.) in the course pursued. The degree is
certified by a diploma bearing the seal and signatures of officers of
this institution.

The work of the Newark College of Engineering is accredited by the
Middle States Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, and by the
American Council on Education.

The courses of this college are registered by The State Education
Department of the University of the State of New York.

National professional engineering societies sponsor student branches at
the College. The societies represented are:

  American Institute of Chemical Engineers
  American Society of Civil Engineers
  American Institute of Electrical Engineers
  American Society of Mechanical Engineers
  Society for the Advancement of Management.

The specific academic requirements in the four courses are shown on the
next following pages for students entering September 1937 and later.

Graduates of 1940 meet similar requirements as stated in earlier issues
of this bulletin.

One Credit Hour is, generally, equivalent to one hour of attendance per
week in class or lecture exercises, and is equivalent to two hours of
attendance per week in laboratory exercises, during a semester.




COMMON AND NON-PROFESSIONAL SUBJECTS

Required in All Courses


                                                        Credit
                              SUBJECT                   Hours
  CH       11  Chemistry                                  9
  CH       21  Qualitative Analysis                       5
  EE[3]    21  Electricity                                6
  ME        1  Engineering Drawing                        5
  ME        2  Engineering Drawing                        2
  Eng      10  English                                    8
  Eng      20  English                                    6
  Eng      50  History of Industrial Civilization         2
  Eng      60  History of Industrial Civilization         2
  Ind E[4] 11  Principles of Engineering (The College)    4
  Ind E    12  Principles of Engineering (The Industry)   2
  Ind E    31  Economics                                  3
  Ind E    41  Accounting                                 3
  Math      1  Mathematics                                7.5
  Math     21  Calculus                                   8
  Mech[5]  20  Mechanics                                  4
  Mech[5]  21  Mechanics                                  4
  Phys      1  Introductory Problems in Physics           2.5
  Phys      2  Physics                                    3.5
  Phys      3  Physics                                    7.5

[3] EE 71 or EE 75 may be substituted for EE 21.

[4] Required of students entering September, 1938, and later.

[5] Mech 22 or Mech 23 may be substituted for Mech 21.

Mech 24 may be substituted for both Mech 20 and Mech 21.




PROFESSIONAL AND TECHNICAL SUBJECTS


Civil Engineering Course

                                                        Credit
                              SUBJECT                   Hours
  CE     1     Surveying                                  8
  CE     2     Surveying                                 10
  CE    10     Sanitation                                 6
  CE    11     Sanitation                                 6.5
  CE    20     Highways                                   3
  CE    21     Highways                                   2
  CE    22     Highway Traffic Control                    2
  CE    30     Structures                                10
  CE    40     Hydraulics                                 4.5
  ME    31     Thermodynamics                             3
  ME    55     Mechanical Engineering                     4.5
  Ind E 13     Staff Control                              3
  Ind E 14     Staff Control                              4
  Ind E 22     Industrial Management                      3
  Ind E 51     Business Law                               1
  Phys  30     Strength of Materials                      7.5


Electrical Engineering Course

                                                        Credit
                              SUBJECT                   Hours
  CE    41     Hydraulics                                 3
  EE    22     Electric Circuits                          7.5
  EE    31     Electric Networks                          2
  EE    32     Electric Transients                        2
  EE    33     Electric Machinery                         8
  EE    35     Electron Tubes                             5
  EE    41     Electric Transmission Equipment            2
  EE    42     Electric Transmission Circuits             3
  EE    43     Electric Machinery                         7
  EE    45     Electrical Measurements                    3.5
  EE    46     Electron Tube Circuits                     2.5
  EE    47     Electrical Design                          3.5
  ME    16     Machine Design                             3
  ME    31     Thermodynamics                             3
  ME    55     Mechanical Engineering                     4.5
  Ind E 13     Staff Control                              3
  Ind E 14     Staff Control                              4
  Ind E 22     Industrial Management                      3
  Ind E 51     Business Law                               1
  Phys  30     Strength of Materials                      7.5


Industrial Chemistry Course

                                                        Credit
                              SUBJECT                   Hours
  CH    22     Inorganic Chemistry                        4
  CH    31     Physical Chemistry                         5
  CH    32     Quantitative Analysis                     11
  CH    33     Thermodynamics                             4
  CH    41     Physical Chemistry                         6
  CH    42     Organic Chemistry                          9
  CH    43     Industrial Chemistry                       3.5
  EE    83     Applied Electricity                        4.5
  ME    16     Machine Design                             3
  ME    55     Mechanical Engineering                     4.5
  Ind E 13     Staff Control                              3
  Ind E 14     Staff Control                              4
  Ind E 22     Industrial Management                      3
  Ind E 51     Business Law                               1
  Phys  30     Strength of Materials                      7.5


Mechanical Engineering Course

                                                        Credit
                              SUBJECT                   Hours
  CE    41     Hydraulics                                 3
  EE    81     Applied Electricity                        9
  ME     7     Shop Practice                              1.5
  ME    10     Mechanisms                                 6
  ME    14     Machine Design                             9
  ME[6] 18     Graphics & Structural Design               4.5
  ME    20     Physical Metallurgy                        3
  ME    22     Metallography                              1.5
  ME    30     Thermodynamics                             4
  ME    34     Heat Power                                 4.5
  ME[6] 36     Power Plants                               3
  ME[6] 37     Applied Heat Power                         3
  ME[6] 50     Mechanical Laboratory                      4
  Ind E 13     Staff Control                              3
  Ind E 14     Staff Control                              4
  Ind E 21     Industrial Management                      5
  Ind E 51     Business Law                               1
  Phys  30     Strength of Materials                      7.5

[6] In the Aeronautical Option the following subjects are required in
place of those marked (6):

  ME    90     General Aeronautics                        6
  ME    91     Airplane Structure                         6
  ME    92     Airplane Engines                           2.5



While passing marks are required as a minimum in all subjects
undertaken, barely passing marks alone do not insure graduation.

To be eligible for graduation, a student is required to attain a grade
of A or B in at least 20% of the credit hours allotted in the catalogue
to professional and technical subjects.

All graduates of the College who desire to become candidates for the
degree C. E., E. E., or M. E., must receive the approval of the
faculty at least eighteen months before the granting of the degree.

Each candidate for the above-mentioned degrees shall render every three
months to the head of the department of which he is a graduate, a
written report on his progress, such report to contain a brief outline
of the engineering work performed by the candidate, the names of
engineering books and articles read by him, and the list of engineering
society meetings which he has attended.

Each candidate shall submit to the faculty, at least four months before
the granting of the degree, a satisfactory thesis upon an approved
subject.

Each candidate shall appear in person upon the appointed commencement
day to receive his degree, unless excused by the faculty.




ADMISSION TO THE COLLEGE


A student may enter the College of Engineering as a matriculated
student, registered as a candidate for a degree, or as a special
student, permitted to attend such courses in the College as he may be
qualified to take, but not as a candidate for a degree.

Applicants may submit certificates of secondary school records to
the College Registrar after March 15 for the next September opening
of College or after December 1 for the next February opening. The
forms for certification will be provided on request. While it is
understood that a complete secondary school record will not usually be
available until later, the partial record will serve for preliminary
consideration of the application.

It is required that each applicant present himself for an interview
at a time arranged by the Registrar so that the College may evaluate
his probable fitness to do engineering college work and subsequently
to find employment in the profession. This estimate will be on the
basis of physical and emotional fitness and on previous scholastic
achievement. In instances where the evidence is not reasonably
conclusive, certain tests and examinations may be required. A fee will
be charged for this testing service.

Every applicant for entrance into the Freshman Class must furnish to
the College a statement of good moral character.

Class room and laboratory facilities, demands of good instruction,
and prospects of employment in a particular field limit the number of
students to be admitted each year. It was found necessary, in view of
these factors, to close the September 1938-39 admissions in Industrial
Chemistry on August 15, 1938, and to require that the matriculation
fee be paid at that time. There is a possibility that this and
other courses may be affected by similar closing dates and that the
matriculation fee may be payable on notification by the Registrar prior
to the registration dates published in this catalog.

It is requested that all Freshmen complete their registration
arrangements for September 1939-40 admissions before Wednesday,
September 13, 1939, at twelve noon. An extra registration fee will be
required of those who register after that time. Similarly, February
admissions will be closed at noon on the Wednesday of registration
week, and the extra registration fee will be held effective after that
time.


ENTRANCE SUBJECTS

All candidates for matriculation must offer eight entrance units in the
following required subjects:

                                   College Entrance Examination
                 SUBJECT                Board Equivalents
  English--4 years           3 units  English
  Elementary Algebra         1 unit   Mathematics A1
  Intermediate Algebra       ½ unit   Mathematics A2
  Plane Trigonometry         ½ unit   Mathematics E or Gamma
  Plane Geometry             1 unit   Mathematics C
  Physics                    1 unit   Elementary Physics
  Chemistry, or            }          Elementary Chemistry
  Biology, or              } 1 unit   Elementary Biology
  General Science          }            ----

and at least seven entrance units in the following elective subjects:

Academic Subjects

  Latin           1, 2, 3 or 4 units  Latin 2, 3A, 3B, 4, H, K
  German          1, 2, 3 or 4 units  German 2, 3 or 4
  French          1, 2, 3 or 4 units  French 2, 3 or 4
  Spanish         1, 2, 3 or 4 units  Spanish 2, 3 or 4
  Italian         1, 2, 3 or 4 units    ----
  History         1, 2, 3 or 4 units  History A, B, C or D
  Adv. Algebra               ½ unit   Mathematics B
  Solid Geometry             ½ unit   Mathematics D
  Economics                  1 unit     ----

While languages are listed here as electives, applicants are advised
that French or German or both are usually required for graduate work.


Commercial and Vocational Subjects[7]

NO C.E.E.B. EQUIVALENTS

  Drawing                    1 unit
  Electricity           ½ or 1 unit
  Joinery               ½ or 1 unit
  Bookkeeping--
    Accounting               1 unit
  Business Law               ½ unit
  Shop                  ½ or 1 unit
  Machine Shop          ½ or 1 unit
  Pattern Making        ½ or 1 unit
  Commercial Geography       1 unit
  History of Commerce        ½ unit

Any other credited High School subject, 1 unit.

A unit, as defined by the College Entrance Examination Board,
represents a year’s study in any subject in a secondary school,
constituting approximately a quarter of a full year’s work. As a
minimum this represents one hundred and twenty sixty-minute hours or
their equivalent.

A four-year secondary school curriculum should be regarded as
representing not more than sixteen units of work.

The classification for special students is provided in order to make
available the privileges of the College to mature men to whom technical
instruction in a limited field would be a benefit, but who have neither
the need nor the necessary time for a full course of study. Such
students are expected to conform to the same standards of attendance
and scholarship as are required of matriculated students. Special
students may receive a statement of work completed.

Students who wish to transfer from other institutions must present
complete credentials including a statement of honorable dismissal to
the Registrar. Applications for admission by transfer students will be
considered only if the applicant meets all requirements which govern
the admission of Freshmen.

A student must satisfy the College of adequate preparation. To do this
he may offer either:

  (A) Any one of the following examinations covering the
  subjects required for admission:

  1. Those given by the College Entrance Examination Board.[8]

  2. The entrance examinations given by the College.

  3. The examinations given by the Education Departments of
  the States of New York and New Jersey to students who have
  satisfactorily completed the courses in the High Schools;

_or_

  (B) A certificate of graduation from an approved High
  School showing the time devoted to each subject and the
  standard attained. Entrance credits will be allowed for
  those subjects only which are satisfactorily credited on
  the certificate.


[7] For commercial and vocational subjects, not more than four units,
provided that not more than one unit be offered in any one subject.

[8] For information regarding these examinations see the next following
pages.




COLLEGE ENTRANCE EXAMINATION BOARD

Scholarship Examinations and Early Examinations for Admission to Be
Held on April 15, 1939


The College Entrance Examination Board will hold examinations at
approximately 150 places in the United States on April 15, 1939, for
applicants for scholarships and for admission to college. A list
of these places will be published about December 15. A detailed
announcement regarding the April series of examinations will be ready
for distribution on October 1.

Every candidate is required to file an application with the Executive
Secretary of the College Entrance Examination Board, 431 West 117
Street, New York, N. Y., not later than March 25, 1939. A candidate
who takes the examinations for admission to college should secure a
blank form of application for examination from the College Entrance
Examination Board; a candidate who takes them in order to qualify for
a scholarship must secure the blank form from the college offering the
scholarship. In order to facilitate the making of arrangements for the
proper conduct of the examinations, it is desired that all applications
be filed as early as possible. The examination fee of ten dollars
should accompany the application for the scholarship tests[9] and
should be remitted by postal order, express order, or draft on New York
to the order of the College Entrance Examination Board.

Applications for examination will be accepted after March 25, 1939,
when it is possible to arrange for the examination of the candidates
concerned, but only upon payment of five dollars in addition to the
regular fee.

When a candidate has failed to obtain the required blank form of
application, the regular examination fee will be accepted if it arrives
not later than March 25, 1939, and if it be accompanied by a memorandum
with the name and address of the candidate, the center at which he will
report for examination, the college to which his report is to be sent,
and the series of examinations (admission or scholarship) he wishes to
take.

No candidate will be admitted to a test late, that is, after the test
has begun. Each candidate who is registered for the Scholastic Aptitude
Test will receive a booklet containing a specimen test with blank
spaces to be filled in by the candidate. In order to secure admission
to the test, the candidate must present not only his ticket of
admission but also this booklet with the spaces filled in as requested.

Inasmuch as no special preparation will be needed for this series of
examinations, detailed information regarding them, with the exception
of the practice booklet for the Scholastic Aptitude Test, will not be
distributed to candidates.

The College Entrance Examination Board will report to the institution
indicated on the candidate’s application the results of his
examinations. Candidates should not expect to receive from the Board
reports upon their examinations.

[9] The fee for the admission series this year will be five dollars.
This series will consist of a form of the Scholastic Aptitude Test
containing a verbal and a mathematical section. There will be no
separate foreign language and mathematics tests.


COLLEGE ENTRANCE EXAMINATION BOARD

Examinations of June 17-24, 1939

The College Entrance Examination Board will hold examinations in
June 1939 at more than three hundred points in this country and
abroad. A list of these places will be published about March 1, 1939.
Requests that the examinations be held at particular points should
be transmitted to the Executive Secretary of the College Entrance
Examination Board not later than February 1, 1939.

Detailed definitions of the requirements in all examination subjects
are given in a circular of information published annually about
December 1. Upon request to the Secretary of the College Entrance
Examination Board a single copy of this document will be sent to any
teacher without charge. In general, there will be a charge of thirty
cents, which may be remitted in postage.

All candidates wishing to take these examinations should make
application by mail to the Secretary of the College Entrance
Examination Board, 431 West 117th Street, New York, N. Y. Blank forms
for this purpose will be mailed by the Secretary of the Board to any
teacher or candidate upon request by mail.

The applications and fees of all candidates who wish to take the
examinations in June 1939 should reach the Secretary of the Board not
later than the dates specified in the following schedule:

For examination centers

  In the United States east of the Mississippi
    River or on the Mississippi                 May   29, 1939

  In the United States west of the Mississippi
    River or in Canada                          May   22, 1939

  Outside of the United States and Canada,
    except in Asia                              May    8, 1939

  In China or elsewhere in the Orient           April 24, 1939

An application which reaches the Secretary later than the scheduled
date will be accepted only upon payment of $5 in addition to the
regular examination fee of $10.

When a candidate has failed to obtain the required blank form of
application, the regular examination fee will be accepted if the fee
arrive not later than the date specified above and if it be accompanied
by a memorandum with the name and address of the candidate, the exact
examination center selected, and a list of the subjects in which the
candidate is to take the Board examinations.

When the examination supplies of the local supervisor permit,
candidates who have failed to file an application with the Secretary
may be admitted, upon payment to the local supervisor of a fee of five
dollars in addition to the regular fee, to all examinations except the
Scholastic Aptitude Test. Such candidates should present themselves at
the beginning of the period of registration. A candidate who registers
with the supervisor will receive from him a blank form of application
and an identification card which must be filled out and handed to the
supervisor for transmission to the Secretary of the Board.

In order to exhibit their tickets of admission, to present their
identification cards, and to obtain seats in the examination room,
candidates should report for a morning examination at 8:45 and for
an afternoon examination at 1:45. An examination will close for
candidates admitted late at the same time as for other candidates. The
examinations will be held in accordance with the time (Standard Time or
Daylight Saving Time) observed in the local schools.

No candidate will be admitted to the Scholastic Aptitude Test late,
that is, after the test has begun.

The Scholastic Aptitude Test may be taken upon the completion of the
school course or at the end of the third year of secondary school
work. Each candidate desiring to take this test, even though he is to
take no other examination, must file with the Secretary of the Board
the usual application for examination. Every candidate who registers
for the test will receive a practice booklet containing a specimen
test with blank spaces to be filled in by the candidate. In order to
secure admission to the test, the candidate must present not only his
ticket of admission but also this booklet with the spaces filled in as
requested. If the Scholastic Aptitude Test is taken in connection with
other examinations, no additional fee is required; if taken alone, the
fee is $10.


EXPENSES


Tuition

To students entering the College for the first time in September of
1939, and later, the tuition will be ninety dollars ($90.00) per
semester for residents of the State, and one hundred and eighty dollars
($180.00) per semester for non-residents.

Students who entered the College in February of 1939, or earlier, will
be charged a tuition fee of eighty-five dollars ($85.00) per semester,
including registration fee, if residing in the State, and one hundred
and seventy dollars ($170.00) per semester if non-residents.

Students who leave the institution before any semester is completed
are _not_ allowed rebate of tuition for the remaining portion of the
semester.

Students who withdraw before completing the first semester must obtain
the Dean’s approval in order to avoid being charged for second semester
tuition.

Tuition charges are somewhat higher for special programs of study
differing from those shown in this bulletin.


Fees

All students entering the College for the first time as candidates for
a degree will be charged a matriculation fee of $10.00.

All students entering the College for the first time in September of
1939, and later, are required to pay a registration fee of $5.00 each
semester.

A fee of $1.00 per year is charged for the use of a locker.

An annual fee of $10.00 is required of all students to cover cost of
expendables in connection with laboratory work, and charges resulting
from breakage, loss of college property and library fines. In some
professional courses where the cost of expendables is high, the charges
may exceed this amount. Liability for these charges is not limited to
the stated fee.

_Registration is required for each term. Freshmen should be guided by
the instructions which are found under “Admission to the College”.
Other students should register not later than noon of the Saturday
before the beginning of the term. An extra registration fee of $5.00
will be required of those who register late._

A fee of $2.00 is charged for the removal of a “condition” grade; a
fee of $1.00 is charged for the removal of an “incomplete” grade.
These fees are payable although such grades are removed without
re-examinations.

For special examinations, taken at times other than those regularly
scheduled, a fee of $2.00 will be charged.

A diploma fee of $10.00 will be required of all candidates for the
Bachelor’s Degree; and a fee of $25.00 for the Professional Degree.

In cases requiring special tests in connection with admission to the
College a fee of $5.00 will be charged.

       *       *       *       *       *

Students who expect to earn their expenses in whole or in part by
outside work should not undertake a full course. They should discuss
their plans with the Dean with the object of making up a schedule of
studies to fit their particular cases.

This college is primarily one for students who commute between their
homes and the school. Dormitories are not provided. Out-of-town
students who wish to room in Newark may apply to the College for aid in
locating desirable accommodations.

Students are advised to defer expenditures for textbooks until they are
certain that changes are not contemplated or necessary.

The College is not responsible for loss of property by fire or theft in
its buildings and grounds.


SCHOLARSHIPS

For young men of ability who need financial assistance there are in all
twenty-five scholarships available.

Application should be made for these scholarships to the President of
the College not later than September the first.


William F. Hoffman Scholarships

Boy Scout Scholarships

In addition to these general scholarships the Board of Trustees of the
College have granted two scholarships, the recipients to be chosen by
the Newark Council of the Boy Scouts of America.


Henry J. Ruesch Scholarships

In memory of Henry J. Ruesch two scholarships have been donated, the
recipients to be graduates of the Newark Technical School.


Herbert P. Gleason Scholarships

By the will of Herbert P. Gleason seven scholarships are available for
young men of character and ability.


STUDENT LIFE

The aim of the College is to train and educate earnest and industrious
students along technical lines. This is the first and the supreme duty
of the College; all other activities are secondary.

The professional departments expect student participation in the
activities of the student branches of the national professional
engineering societies.

The Faculty recognizes the importance of social and athletic activities
if properly co-ordinated with the more serious work of instruction.


ATHLETICS

In common with some of the better technical institutions in the country
the College does not support a varsity football or baseball team. The
athletic activities are designed to interest the average student and to
develop _him_ rather than to overdevelop a small group.

Varsity competition in basketball, fencing, tennis and track athletics
is encouraged, and the College each year puts teams into the field.




DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING

  Professor H. N. Cummings
  Assoc. Prof. W. S. La Londe
  Asst. Prof. O. P. L. Albert
  Asst. Prof. J. M. Robbins
  Asst. Prof. R. W. Van Houten
  Mr. F. A. Busse
  Mr. D. C. Frost
  Mr. W. J. Hoffman


The Civil Engineering course is planned to prepare young men for
municipal engineering work, highway work, construction work, or work in
the general field of scientific management. Because of the temporary
slowing down of work in the civil engineering field, during recent
years, streets, highways, water supply and sewage disposal systems,
bridges, etc. have become seriously run-down or inadequate. Trained
young men will be needed in the near future to take part in the
repair, replacement, or enlargement of these necessities. The trend
toward large sectional projects, sponsored by the federal government,
indicates another field of opportunity for young men trained in civil
engineering.

To give students training in the fundamentals of civil engineering, so
that they may qualify for employment in any of the lines of work above
mentioned, a problem in municipal engineering is used, providing much
of the instruction of Junior and Senior years. A topographical survey
and map are made of a tract of land containing about a hundred acres.
This tract is then subdivided into streets and lots as in a suburban
community. The water supply and sewage disposal systems for this tract
are designed in connection with the sanitation course. Streets and
roads are located and designed as a problem in the highway course.
Bridges, culverts, retaining-walls, etc., such as would be required in
municipal, or highway work, are designed as part of the work of the
senior course in structures.

Active membership in the Student Chapter of the American Society of
Civil Engineers is expected of students in this department.


Field Equipment in Civil Engineering

The department has complete and up-to-date equipment for conducting
plane, topographic and hydrographic surveys. The equipment includes
plane and engineer’s transits, levels, plane tables, current meter,
sextants, tapes, level and stadia rods, range poles and all other
necessary surveying accessories.


Surveying Summer Camp

The complete facilities of the Summer Camp of the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology at East Machias, Maine, are available to a
limited number of students who are selected on the basis of proficiency
in Surveying and general excellence in scholarship. Applicants will be
chosen from the group invited to participate in the Honors Option, and
will be given the summer camp assignment in place of the industrial
assignment given to the other members of the group. The Newark College
of Engineering will give to students receiving this assignment
scholarships covering a portion of the camp fee.

The M. I. T. Summer Camp is located in a region particularly well
suited to instruction in large scale surveying projects, such as
geodetic triangulation, mapping of large areas, reconnaissance for
highway or railroad location, hydrographic surveying, stream gaging,
etc. The camp itself is equipped with modern buildings, sanitary
water supply and sewage disposal, fire hydrants and fire-fighting
apparatus, and an emergency hospital. The staff includes a practising
physician. Students and faculty live in dormitories (known at the camp
as barracks) and eat in the camp dining room. The camp is within a
few minutes, by automobile, from the East Machias railroad station.
Students attending in 1939 will report during the last week of July and
remain at the camp seven weeks.




CIVIL ENGINEERING COURSE, B.S. (C.E.)

Courses offered to students entering September 1937 and later.

 FIRST YEAR (Given in 1939-1940)


 First Semester

                                                    Attendance  Hours
                      SUBJECT                          Rec.     Lab.
 CH       11   Chemistry                                3        3
 ME        1   Engineering Drawing                      1        3
 Eng      10   English                                  4        0
 Eng      50   History of Industrial Civilization       1        0
 Ind E    11   Principles of Engineering (The College)  2        0
 Math      1   Mathematics                              3        3
 Phys      1   Introductory Problems in Physics         0        3


 Second Semester

 CH       11   Chemistry                                3        3
 ME        1   Engineering Drawing                      1        3
 Eng      10   English                                  4        0
 Eng      50   History of Industrial Civilization       1        0
 Ind E    11   Principles of Engineering (The College)  2        0
 Math      1   Mathematics                              2        2
 Phys      1   Introductory Problems in Physics         0        2
 Phys      2   Physics                                  2        3


 SECOND YEAR (Given in 1939-1940)


 First Semester

 CE        1   Surveying                                3        3
 CH       21   Qualitative Analysis                     1        3
 ME        2   Engineering Drawing                      0        2
 Eng      20   English                                  3        0
 Eng      60   History of Industrial Civilization       1        0
 Ind E    12   Principles of Engineering
                 (The Industry)                         0        2
 Math     21   Calculus                                 3        2
 Mech     20   Mechanics                                2        0
 Phys      3   Physics                                  4        0


 Second Semester

 CE        1   Surveying                                2        3
 CH       21   Qualitative Analysis                     1        3
 ME        2   Engineering Drawing                      0        2
 Eng      20   English                                  3        0
 Eng      60   History of Industrial Civilization       1        0
 Ind E    12   Principles of Engineering
                 (The Industry)                         0        2
 Math     21   Calculus                                 3        2
 Mech     20   Mechanics                                2        0
 Phys      3   Physics                                  2        3


 SUMMER WORK

 Ind E  60     Co-operative Work
                 (required for Honors Option Group).


 THIRD YEAR (Given in 1939-1940)


 First Semester

 CE        2   Surveying                                2        6
 CE       10   Sanitation                               2        0
 CE       20   Highways                                 3        0
 CE       40   Hydraulics                               3        3
 Ind E    13   Staff Control                            0        2
 Math[10] 31   Differential Equations                   3        0
 Mech     22   Mechanics                                2        0
 Phys     30   Strength of Materials                    3        0


 Second Semester

 CE        2   Surveying                                2        6
 CE       10   Sanitation                               4        0
 Ind E    13   Staff Control                            2        0
 Ind E    31   Economics                                3        0
 Math[11] 32   Vector Analysis                          3        0
 Mech     22   Mechanics                                2        0
 Phys     30   Strength of Materials                    3        3


 SUMMER WORK

 Ind E    61      Co-operative Work
                    (required for Honors Option Group)


 FOURTH YEAR


 First Semester

 CE       11   Sanitation                               2        3
 CE       21   Highways                                 0        4
 CE       22   Highway Traffic Control                  1        0
 CE       30   Structures                               3        4
 EE       75   Electricity                              3        0
 ME       31   Thermodynamics                           3        0
 Ind E    14   Staff Control                            1        2
 Ind E    22   Industrial Management                    3        0


 Second Semester

 CE       11   Sanitation                               2        2
 CE       22   Highway Traffic Control                  1        0
 CE       30   Structures                               3        4
 EE       75   Electricity                              3        0
 ME       55   Mechanical Engineering                   3        3
 Ind E    14   Staff Control                            1        2
 Ind E    41   Accounting                               3        0
 Ind E    51   Business Law                             1        0

  Note: Students who wish to reduce the amount of work per
  semester in Freshman and Sophomore subjects may apply to
  the Dean for a regular five year schedule.

[10] Math 31 is optional but recommended for students who contemplate
graduate work.

[11] Math 32 is optional but recommended for students who contemplate
graduate work.




CIVIL ENGINEERING COURSE, B.S. (C.E.)

Offered in academic year 1939-40 to students who completed Junior
requirements before September 1939


FOURTH YEAR


First Semester

                                                    Attendance  Hours
                       SUBJECT                         Rec.     Lab.
 CE       11-2 Sanitation                               2        0
 CE       21   Highways                                 0        4
 CE       22   Highway Traffic Control                  2        0
 CE       30-2 Structures                               2        8
 ME       55   Mechanical Engineering                   3        3
 Ind E    14   Staff Control                            1        2
 Ind E    22   Industrial Management                    3        0
 Ind E    51   Business Law                             1        0
               Co-operative Office or Field work


 Second Semester

 CE       11-2 Sanitation                               2        0
 CE       21   Highways                                 0        4
 CE       22   Highway Traffic Control                  2        0
 CE       30-2 Structures                               2        8
 ME       55   Mechanical Engineering                   3        3
 Ind E    14   Staff Control                            1        2
 Ind E    22   Industrial Management                    3        0
 Ind E    51   Business Law                             1        0
               Co-operative Office or Field work


  SUBJECTS OF INSTRUCTION
  in the
  DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING

CE 1 Surveying: Prerequisite, Satisfactory Sophomore Standing.

  A course designed to equip the student with a knowledge of
  the principles and practice of elementary surveying and
  closely allied sciences and to enable him to apply this
  scientific information to the professional work of the
  civil engineer. For descriptive purposes the course is
  subdivided as follows:

  Surveying. A study of plane and topographic surveying,
  consisting of classwork, fieldwork and drafting. The
  classwork covers a thorough drill in the principles of
  these branches of surveying. This is supplemented by
  field exercises covering the use, care, and adjustment
  of instruments, and cadastral and engineering surveys
  of elementary character. The work in the drafting room
  consists of problems involving the interpretation and
  preparation of topographic, construction, and property
  maps. Texts: A, B, C, D, E.

  Engineering Geology. A study of geologic science,
  with particular emphasis on the relationship between
  physiography, geology, topography, water supply, and the
  design of engineering structures. Laboratory studies of
  common rocks, rock-forming minerals and of topographic and
  geologic maps are made in connection with this course.
  Texts: A, F.

  General Astronomy. A short course in general astronomy
  designed to broaden the background of the student and
  to enable him to obtain a better grasp of the work in
  practical astronomy given during the Junior year.
  Texts: A, G.

  _Texts_: _A._ _Departmental Manual I, “Professional Work of
                   the Sophomore Year”._
           _B._ _Breed and Hosmer, “Principles and Practice of
                   Surveying,” Vol. I._
           _C._ _Breed and Hosmer, “Principles and Practice of
                   Surveying,” Vol. II._
           _D._ _Robbins, “Problems in Surveying, CE 1”._
           _E._ _Vega, “Logarithms”._
           _F._ _Ries and Watson, “Elements of Engineering Geology”._
           _G._ _Jeans, “The Stars in Their Courses”._

CE 2 Surveying. Prerequisite, CE 1.

  A continuation of the work begun in CE 1. The course
  covers the fields of hydrographic and geodetic
  surveying and practical astronomy. The route surveying
  classwork, formerly given in this course, is now covered
  simultaneously in the course in Highways CE 20 and CE 21.
  Route survey fieldwork is covered in the fieldwork of
  the surveying course. The course consists of classwork,
  fieldwork and drafting. The classwork covers a thorough
  drill in the principles of hydrographic and geodetic
  surveying and spherical trigonometry and practical
  astronomy. This is supplemented by fieldwork covering the
  use of the stadia, plane table and traverse board in the
  execution of topographic and engineering surveys, the
  methods of gaging streams, the geodetic and astronomic
  work necessary for control surveys, and the execution of
  preliminary and location route surveys for highways and
  sewers which are used in the design work of the courses
  in Highways and Sanitation. The work in the drafting room
  covers all computations and plotting necessary to complete
  a topographic map from the field surveys.

  _Texts_: _A._ _Departmental Manual II, “Professional Work of
                   the Junior Year”._
           _B._ _Breed and Hosmer, “Principles and Practice of
                   Surveying,” Vol. II._
           _C._ _Hosmer, “Practical Astronomy”._
           _D._ _Hosmer, “Geodesy”._
           _E._ _Pickets & Wiley, “Route Surveying”._
           _F._ _Robbins, “Notes on Spherical Trigonometry”._
           _G._ _Robbins, “Problems in Surveying, CE 2.”_
           _H._ _American Nautical Almanac, 1939._
           _I._ _Vega, “Logarithms”._


CE 10 Sanitation. Prerequisite, Satisfactory Junior Standing.

  A study of the principles of sanitary science and public
  health subdivided as follows:

  Hydrology. A study of the principles of hydrology with
  particular emphasis on their application to problems of
  water supply and storm water disposal.

  Public Health. A study of the engineering control of
  communicable diseases through the proper collection,
  treatment, and disposal of municipal wastes; the provision
  of safe water, milk and foods; the control of rodents and
  insects; the sanitation of public buildings; housing; and
  industrial hygiene.

  Water Supply. A study of the methods used to investigate
  the water supply needs of a community; the selection of the
  required supply and the design of the collection works.
  Distribution works are taken up in a later course.

  _Texts: Mead, “Hydrology”; Ehlers and Steel, “Municipal
  and Rural Sanitation”; Babbitt and Doland, “Water Supply
  Engineering”. Certain reference books from a department
  list, to be read during the summer preceding the taking of
  the course._


CE 10, 11-1 Sanitation. Prerequisite, Satisfactory Junior Standing.

  A study of the principles of sanitary science and public
  health subdivided as follows:

  Public Health. A study of the engineering control of
  communicable diseases through the proper collection,
  treatment and disposal of municipal wastes; the provision
  of safe water, milk and foods; the control of rodents and
  insects; the sanitation of public buildings; housing; and
  industrial hygiene.

  Hydrology. A study of the principles of hydrology with
  particular emphasis on their application to problems of
  water supply and storm water disposal. Computations and
  designs are carried out in connection with the study of the
  water resources of a particular stream.

  Water Supply. A study of the methods followed by engineers
  in investigating the water supply needs of a community; the
  location of the required supply; the determination of the
  proper means of conveying the water to the community; and
  the design and construction of works in connection with
  water supply development.

  Sewerage. A study of the design, construction and
  maintenance of storm water drains and sanitary sewers,
  accompanied by the design of such drains for a small
  community and the preparation of cost estimates and
  specifications for the same.

  _Texts: Ehlers and Steel, “Municipal and Rural Sanitation”;
  Mead, “Hydrology”; Babbitt and Doland, “Water Supply
  Engineering”; Metcalf and Eddy, “Sewerage and Sewage
  Disposal”. Certain reference books from a department list,
  to be read during the summer preceding the taking of the
  course._


CE 11-2 Sanitation. Prerequisite, CE 10, CH 21.

  A continuation of the study begun in CE 10, 11-1 and
  covering the design and construction of works for the
  purification of water and the treatment of sewage.

  _Texts: Babbitt and Doland, “Water Supply Engineering”;
  Metcalf and Eddy, “Sewerage and Sewage Disposal”._


CE 20 Highway. Prerequisite, CE 1.

  This course in Highways consists of lectures, student
  reports and problems, covering the following topics:
  highway location, with special attention to the part
  reconnaissance surveys and traffic surveys play in
  determining the proper location for a highway; the design
  of roads, dealing with the establishing of grade lines,
  street intersections, curves, cross-sections and grade
  separations; grading; highway drainage; soil studies,
  especially the characteristics of subgrade soils, the
  grouping of subgrade soils and the conclusions to be
  drawn from soil studies; non-bituminous and bituminous
  materials for low-cost roads; natural subgrade treatments
  and untreated surfaces; bituminous surface treatments;
  road-mixed and plant-mixed bituminous surfaces;
  bituminous-macadam bituminized cement and cement-bound
  macadam roads; portland-cement concrete pavements;
  base courses for pavements; both hot-mix and cold-laid
  bituminous pavements; maintenance of bituminous pavements;
  brick and block pavements; the construction and location
  of sidewalks, curbs, gutters, guard rails and other
  appurtenances; highway beautification and lighting;
  estimates, contracts, and specifications; street cleaning
  and snow removal; and the location and construction of
  landing fields and runways for airports.

  The field work in Highways is given in connection with the
  field work in Surveying CE 2.

  _Texts: Bruce, “Highway Design and Construction”; Pickels
  and Wiley, “Route Surveying”; Van Houten, “Problems in
  Highways, C. E. 20”._


CE 21 Highways. Prerequisites, CE 2, CE 20.

  This is a course in Highway Design in which two problems
  are undertaken. In the first, plans are prepared for
  the improvement and paving of about one-quarter mile of
  city streets. Details of sidewalks, curbs, pavements and
  drainage are taken into account. The field notes for this
  problem are obtained in the course in Surveying CE 2. In
  the second problem a paper location of a highway is made
  from a contour map (similar to that prepared in Surveying
  CE 2) for about two miles of rural highway. Plans are
  prepared which subscribe to the practice and standards of
  the New Jersey State Highway Department. Attention is given
  to alignment, grade and cost, with a special study made of
  the earth quantities and placement.

  _Texts: Bruce, “Highway Design and Construction”; Pickels
  and Wiley, “Route Surveying”._


CE 22 Highway Traffic Control. Prerequisite CE 20.

  A course designed to give the student a comprehensive
  knowledge of the problems encountered in the field of
  highway traffic control together with a thorough study of
  current methods of dealing with those problems.

  The course is presented in the form of lectures by the
  instructor, reports by the students, supplementary reading,
  and, whenever practicable, field studies and analyses
  of actual traffic problems. The subjects covered are as
  follows: purposes of traffic control; accident statistics;
  accident records as a basis for accident prevention
  with special attention being paid to the use of spot
  maps, flow diagrams and collision diagrams in analysing
  traffic problems; legislation and administration as a
  means of regulating traffic; examination of applicants
  for drivers’ licenses; through and stop streets; critical
  approach speeds; traffic control at intersections by
  traffic beacons, traffic officers and traffic signals;
  studies of rotary and channellized intersections; highway
  and railway grade crossing elimination; traffic lanes,
  centerline markings; highway lighting; parking; education
  of all groups from the pre-school child to the adult;
  law enforcement, especially studying the problem of the
  drinking driver and the “accident repeater”; and traffic
  courts and violations bureaus.

  Reference Material: This is composed of all available
  literature in the field of traffic control. A few of the
  organizations and institutions whose literature is used
  are as follows: American Association of State Highway
  Officials; American Automobile Association; American Road
  Builders’ Association; Bureau of Public Roads; Institute
  of Traffic Engineers; International Association of
  Chiefs of Police; Iowa State College; Metropolitan Life
  Insurance Company; Motor Vehicle Department of New Jersey
  and numerous other states; National Bureau of Casualty
  and Surety Underwriters; National Conference on Street
  and Highway Safety; National Safety Council; New Jersey
  Traffic Commission; Northwestern University Traffic
  Safety Institute; Portland Cement Association; Travelers
  Insurance Company; University of Illinois; University of
  Michigan; and University of Wisconsin.


CE 30-1 Structures. Prerequisite, First Semester Phys 30.

  This course forms a transition between the previous
  courses of mechanics (statics) and strength of materials
  and the course in structures CE 30-2 given to the senior
  civil students. It treats of a more rounded and complete
  study of reaction and internal stresses in roof trusses
  and statically determinate bridges by both analytical and
  graphical methods. Special emphasis is placed upon the
  construction and use of influence lines. A short time is
  devoted to the approximate solution of lateral bracing and
  portals.

  _Text: Sutherland and Bowman “Structural Theory”, 2nd Ed._


CE 30-2 Structures. Prerequisites, CE 30-1, complete course. Phys 30.

  The work of this course is divided between a theoretical
  study of statically indeterminate structures and the design
  of a variety of small structures. A thorough theoretical
  study is made of the deflection of beams and trusses and
  of the methods of least work, slope deflection, moment
  distribution, and the column analogy. Secondary stresses,
  space framework and wind stresses in buildings receive
  their proportion of attention. Throughout the work in
  theory those structures that are to be later designed and
  detailed are used for class problems, thereby making a
  close tie between the theory and design and eliminating
  an unnecessary amount of duplication in arithmetical
  calculations. Problems are given in the design of, and
  complete preparation of plans for roof trusses, buildings,
  foundations, abutments, retaining walls, trestles, trusses,
  girders, and frames of concrete, steel, and wood, with
  a study of timber, riveted, and welded framing. Highway
  loadings are used in preference to railroad loadings in
  order to simplify computations. Particular emphasis is
  placed upon orderly and complete computations, standard
  and practical considerations of design and detail, and
  thoroughness and neatness in drafting. Given to senior
  students in civil engineering.

  _Texts: Sutherland and Bowman, “Structural Theory, Second
  Edition”; Caughey, “Reinforced Concrete”; Fuller & Kerekes,
  “Analysis & Design of Steel Structures”; A. I. S. C.,
  “Steel Construction Handbook”. Certain reference books from
  a department list to be read during the summer preceding
  the taking of the course._


CE 30 Structures.

  Courses CE 30-1 and CE 30-2 will be combined in one senior
  course in 1940-41 and later years.


CE 40 Hydraulics. Prerequisites, Math. 21, Mech. 20.

  The subject matter is the same as in CE 41. In addition, a
  laboratory course is given, in which the characteristics
  of flow are studied for various types of conduits and
  measuring devices, and also for various degrees of
  viscosity of the liquid. Given to students in civil
  engineering.

  _Texts: Cummings and Widdop, “Elementary Hydraulics”;
  Laboratory Manual of the Mechanical Engineering Department._


CE 41 Hydraulics. Prerequisites, Math. 21, Mech. 20.

  This is a text-book and problem course. The subject
  of hydrostatics is treated briefly, from the point of
  view of review work in physics and applied mechanics.
  In hydrokinetics, the energy balances are emphasized as
  providing means of solving problems in theoretic flow
  through orifices, pipes, open channels, and over weirs.
  Constant emphasis is placed on the degree of precision
  obtainable, in practice, by the use of the available
  experimentally determined constants to modify theoretical
  computations to meet actual conditions. Given to chemical,
  electrical, and mechanical students.

  _Text: Cummings and Widdop, “Elementary Hydraulics”._




DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

  Professor J. C. Peet
  Professor A. A. Nims
  Asst. Prof. S. Fishman
  Asst. Prof. F. E. McKone
  Asst. Prof. P. C. Shedd
  Mr. J. H. Johnston
  Mr. W. Jordan, 3rd
  Mr. F. A. Russell
  Mr. C. H. Stephans


The problems and techniques associated with the production, delivery,
utilization and control of energy in the electrical form are given the
inclusive title of Electrical Engineering. Any general preparation for
the recognition and analysis of these problems and the mastery of these
techniques, in their infinite variety, must, of necessity, emphasize
the basic conceptions and principles which are of widest application.
Specific applications, sufficient in number and variety to maintain the
student’s interest and broaden his point of view are, however, useful
supplements.

The work of the freshman and sophomore years consists, primarily, of
the foundation mathematics, physics, English and mechanical drafting
usually given to all engineering students. In addition, a course in the
fundamental electrical units and their application to the magnetic,
electro-static and electric circuits, is given. This is followed by a
general engineering course in d-c and a-c circuits. The classroom work
is paralleled by a laboratory course in electrical measurements.

During the upper class years the principles of electrical engineering
are applied to many problems; characteristics and operation of
direct-current, synchronous, and induction machinery, rectification,
wave form analysis, transient phenomena, power plant equipment,
transmission and distribution and electro-physical measurements in
magnetism, in induction and capacitance by balance methods and in
multi-electrode vacuum tube characteristics.

A student branch of The American Institute of Electrical Engineers
holds about eight or ten meetings each year. All upper classmen become
members and are expected to attend its meetings. The second year men
are invited to join the local society.

Since electrical engineering is closely related to mechanical and
chemical engineering much material from these branches is included in
the course.


The Electrical Laboratories

The electrical laboratories are located on the first floor of the
Laboratory Building. A centrally located stock room houses much of the
equipment used for test and measurement.

Electric power for the laboratories is obtained from the Public
Service Electric & Gas Company through a 240-volt, 3-phase, 60-cycle
alternating current line. By means of transformers, motor-generator
sets, synchronous converters, oscillators, rectifiers, and storage
batteries, direct or alternating current power of wide range of voltage
and frequency is available. This power can be distributed to any part
of the laboratories on either two or three wire lines, through a
carefully planned distribution system.

Equipment is available for setting up all types of electric circuits,
reactive and non-reactive, for either direct or alternating current
power, together with the usual voltmeters, ammeters, and wattmeters,
required in the measurement of these circuits.

Several examples of each of the fundamental types of generators and
motors for both direct and alternating current, as well as the usual
transformers and various special types are conveniently arranged for
study and complete tests.

Special types of instruments for extreme range of voltage current
and power are also available, together with special instruments such
as frequency meters, power factor meters, electro-static voltmeters,
oscillographs, and bridge networks for resistance, capacitance and
inductance.

Provision is also made for extensive study of the fundamental operating
characteristics of the vacuum tubes of many kinds which are so widely
used in the control of electric power in its various forms.

The following equipment is worthy of special mention:

A General Electric Educational Set consisting of a synchronous machine;
a wound-rotor induction machine; a squirrel cage induction machine;
and a double-current generator, each with a 15 k v a rating and wound
for either 1, 2, 3 or 6 phase operation.

A Westinghouse synchronous motor-generator set, rated at 15 k v a and
wound for 1, 2, 3 or 6 phases. One machine is arranged as a cradle
dynamometer and equipped for phase shifting.

A General Electric sine-wave generator coupled to a synchronous motor.
This machine generates a voltage wave which conforms accurately to
standard wave form. It has a capacity of 5 k v a for three phases and
has a ring gear mechanism for phase shifting.

A two-unit General Electric motor-generator set consisting of one 5
k v a generator capable of single-, three- or six-phase operation at
110/220 volts. This is coupled to a 5-kw, 250-volt d-c machine.

Three mercury-arc rectifiers complete with switchboards and auxiliaries.

Three General Electric Oscillographs complete with all auxiliary
apparatus.

One Westinghouse four-element Oscillograph.

One Westinghouse Osiso.

One Sundt Neobeam Oscilloscope.

One Du Mont Cathode-Ray Oscilloscope.

One Westinghouse Audio Oscillator.

One Western Electric Audio Oscillator.


ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING COURSE, B.S. (E.E.)

Courses offered to students entering September 1937 and later.


 FIRST YEAR (Given in 1939-1940)


 First Semester

                                                   Attendance  Hours
                         SUBJECT                       Rec.    Lab.
 CH       11   Chemistry                                3       3
 ME        1   Engineering Drawing                      1       3
 Eng      10   English                                  4       0
 Eng      50   History of Industrial Civilization       1       0
 Ind E    11   Principles of Engineering
                 (The College)                          2       0
 Math      1   Mathematics                              3       3
 Phys      1   Introductory Problems in Physics         0       3


 Second Semester

 CH       11   Chemistry                                3       3
 ME        1   Engineering Drawing                      1       3
 Eng      10   English                                  4       0
 Eng      50   History of Industrial Civilization       1       0
 Ind E    11   Principles of Engineering
                 (The College)                          2       0
 Math      1   Mathematics                              2       2
 Phys      1   Introductory Problems in Physics         0       2
 Phys      2   Physics                                  2       3


 SECOND YEAR (Given in 1939-1940)


 First Semester

 EE       21   Electricity                              5       3
 ME        2   Engineering Drawing                      0       2
 Eng      20   English                                  3       0
 Eng      60   History of Industrial Civilization       1       0
 Ind E    12   Principles of Engineering
                 (The Industry)                         0       2
 Math     21   Calculus                                 3       2
 Mech     20   Mechanics                                2       0
 Phys      3   Physics                                  4       0


 Second Semester

 EE       22   Electric Circuits                        6       3
 ME        2   Engineering Drawing                      0       2
 Eng      20   English                                  3       0
 Eng      60   History of Industrial Civilization       1       0
 Ind E    12   Principles of Engineering
                 (The Industry)                         0       2
 Math     21   Calculus                                 3       2
 Mech     20   Mechanics                                2       0
 Phys      3   Physics                                  2       3


 SUMMER WORK

 Ind E    60   Co-operative Work
                 (required for Honors Option Group).


 THIRD YEAR (Given in 1939-1940)


 First Semester

 CH       21   Qualitative Analysis                     1       3
 EE       31   Electric Networks                        2       0
 EE       33   Electric Machinery                       2       3
 EE       35   Electron Tubes                           1       3
 ME       31   Thermodynamics                           3       0
 Ind E    13   Staff Control                            0       2
 Math[12] 31   Differential Equations                   3       0
 Mech     21   Mechanics                                2       0
 Phys     30   Strength of Materials                    3       3


 Second Semester

 CH       21   Qualitative Analysis                     1       3
 EE       32   Electric Transients                      2       0
 EE       33   Electric Machinery                       3       3
 EE       35   Electron Tubes                           1       3
 Ind E    13   Staff Control                            2       0
 Ind E    31   Economics                                3       0
 Math[13] 32   Vector Analysis                          3       0
 Mech     21   Mechanics                                2       0
 Phys     30   Strength of Materials                    3       0


 SUMMER WORK

 Ind E    61   Co-operative Work
                 (required for Honors Option Group).


 FOURTH YEAR


 First Semester

 CE       41   Hydraulics                               3       0
 EE       41   Electric Transmission Equipment          2       0
 EE       43   Electric Machinery                       2       3
 EE       45   Electrical Measurements                  2       3
 EE       47   Electrical Design                        0       4
 ME       55   Mechanical Engineering                   0       3
 Ind E    14   Staff Control                            1       2
 Ind E    22   Industrial Management                    3       0
 Ind E    51   Business Law                             1       0


 Second Semester

 EE       42   Electric Transmission Circuits           3       0
 EE       43   Electric Machinery                       2       3
 EE       46   Electron Tube Circuits                   1       3
 EE       47   Electrical Design                        0       3
 ME       16   Machine Design                           3       0
 ME       55   Mechanical Engineering                   3       0
 Ind E    14   Staff Control                            1       2
 Ind E    41   Accounting                               3       0

  Note: Students who wish to reduce the amount of work per
  semester in Freshman and Sophomore subjects may apply to
  the Dean for a regular five year schedule.

[12] Math 31 is optional but recommended for students who contemplate
graduate work.

[13] Math 32 is optional but recommended for students who contemplate
graduate work.




ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING COURSE, B.S. (E.E.)

Offered in academic year 1939-40 to students who completed Junior
requirements before September 1939


FOURTH YEAR


First Semester

                                                    Attendance  Hours
                          SUBJECT                       Rec.    Lab.
 EE       41    Electric Transmission Equipment          5       0
 EE       45    Electrical Measurements                  3       6
 EE       47-2  Electrical Design II                     0       4
 ME       55    Mechanical Engineering                   3       3
 Ind E    14    Staff Control                            1       2
 Ind E    22    Industrial Management                    3       0
 Ind E    51    Business Law                             1       0
                Co-operative Industrial Work.


 Second Semester

 EE       42    Electric Transmission Circuits           5       0
 EE       46    Electron Tube Circuits                   3       6
 EE       47-2  Electrical Design II                     0       4
 ME       55    Mechanical Engineering                   3       3
 Ind E    14    Staff Control                            1       2
 Ind E    22    Industrial Management                    3       0
 Ind E    51    Business Law                             1       0
                Co-operative Industrial Work.


  SUBJECTS OF INSTRUCTION
  in the
  DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

EE 21 Electricity.

  This is the fundamental electrical course for all
  electrical engineering students. The lecture, class and
  laboratory method is used. The subject is treated from
  the point of view of the physicist. The electron theory
  is the basis. For each phenomenon considered a physical
  explanation is given as well as a mathematical expression.
  Particular attention is given to the proper definition
  of the units of measurement. The relation between these
  quantities is emphasized by problem work.

  Laboratory work in measurements and the proper use of
  instruments is carried on at the same time.

  _Texts: Zeleny, “Elements of Electrical Engineering”; Peet,
  “Laboratory Manual in Electricity”._


EE 22 Electric Circuits.

  This is a lecture, recitation and laboratory course in the
  fundamental electrical units and their proper application
  to the usual direct current and alternating current
  circuits. It is given to all electrical students in the
  second semester of the sophomore year.

  A general list of the topics is as follows: Magnetism,
  electro-magnetism; electric current, pressure and
  resistance; electric power and energy; series, parallel
  and series parallel circuits; Kirchhoff’s law; three-wire
  system; electro-statics; dielectric circuit; alternating
  current circuits containing resistance, inductive
  reactance and capacitive reactance in series and parallel
  combinations by graphical, analytical and complex quantity
  methods; single and polyphase alternating current circuits.

  Laboratory work in direct-current and constant frequency
  alternating current circuits supplements the classroom work.

  _Texts: Dawes, “Electrical Engineering”, Vol. I & II; Peet,
  “Laboratory Manual in Electricity”._


EE 31 Electric Networks.

  For the purpose of making analyses of electric networks the
  following principles are introduced:

  Algebra of Complex Quantities
  Kirchhoff’s Laws
  “T” to “Pi” transformation
  Thevenin’s Theorem
  Superposition Theorem
  Magnetic and dielectric coupling
  Resonance

  _Text: Everitt, “Communication Engineering”; Fishman,
  “Electric Circuit Projects”._


EE 32 Electric Transients.

  The transient conditions existing in direct and alternating
  current circuits whenever the current values are suddenly
  changed are of great importance in many electrical
  problems. To investigate these an analysis is made of
  the time variation of energy, power, current and voltage
  whenever there is a readjustment of energy in these
  circuits. The analysis is made for circuits in which energy
  is stored in either magnetic or dielectric form or in both
  forms.

  _Text: Fishman, “Electric Circuit Projects”._


EE 33 Electric Machinery. Prerequisites, EE 21, EE 22.

  The subject matter of this course is presented in three
  divisions as follows:

  a. A study of direct-current generator and motor
     characteristic curves, separation of losses, regulation and
     efficiency, parallel operation, three-wire and pump-back
     tests, armature reaction and commutation.

  b. A similar study of alternating current machinery
     includes transformers, alternators, synchronous and
     asynchronous polyphase motors, single-phase motors and
     converters.

  c. Armature windings: development from elementary coil
     of both ring and drum types; representation of both open
     and closed circuit winding by circular diagrams, tables
     and vector diagrams; bipolar and multipolar, simplex and
     multiplex windings; phase distribution and distribution
     factors.

  An extensive laboratory course supplements the class work.

  _Texts: Dawes, “Electrical Engineering”, Vol. I & II;
  “Standard Handbook for Electrical Engineers” (Sixth
  Edition); Nims, “Armature Winding Notes”, Fishman and Shedd
  Laboratory Manual “Electric Machinery”._


EE 35 Electron Tubes. Prerequisites, EE 21, EE 22.

  A study is made of the following electronic devices:

  Volt-ampere characteristics of contact rectifiers.

  Illumination-response of photo-sensitive devices
  (conductive, voltaic, vacuum and gas emissive cells).

  Emission from tungsten, thoriated tungsten and oxide-coated
  cathodes.

  Characteristics and coefficients of vacuum diodes, triodes
  and multigrid tubes.

  The electron gun.

  Ignition and volt-ampere characteristics of cold cathode,
  hot cathode, and pool cathode gas and vapor tubes.

  Methods of controlling output of gas and vapor tubes by
  means of grids.

  _Texts: Fishman, “Electronics Laboratory Projects”._


EE 41 Electric Transmission Equipment.
      Prerequisite, Satisfactory Senior Standing.

  The accessory apparatus for the production of electric
  power, and its transmission and distribution to the
  consumer is the basis of a seminar type course. Each
  student investigates an assigned topic in some detail and
  discusses his findings for the information of the class.
  Prime movers, generator excitation and voltage regulation,
  feeder voltage regulation, station wiring layouts,
  switchboards and switching gear, reactors, relays and relay
  systems, line disturbances and line protection, plant
  economics and energy rates, industrial motor application
  and control are topics treated.

  _Text: “Standard Handbook for Electrical Engineers” (Sixth Edition)._


EE 42 Electric Transmission Circuits. Prerequisites, EE 31, EE 32.

  Aspects of electric power transmission which are subject to
  analytical attack are treated by lecture and computation
  methods.

  The topics included are: Calculation of short lines,
  low voltage distribution, conductor materials, spacing,
  corona effect, economic voltage and frequency, hyperbolic
  functions and the calculation of line constants,
  calculation of long lines by graphical, approximate and
  rigorous methods, comparison of methods, synchronous
  machines for power factor and voltage control, effect of
  transformers included in circuit regulation.

  _Text: Woodruff, “Electric Power Transmission and
  Distribution”; Everitt, “Communication Engineering”._


EE 43 Electric Machinery. Prerequisite EE 33.

  A continuation of Electric Machinery EE 33.


EE 45 Electrical Measurements. Prerequisites, EE 31, EE 32.

  This is mainly a laboratory course illustrating some of
  the more advanced problems in electric circuits. In the
  associated classroom work the principles underlying the
  laboratory problems are discussed and the quantitative
  relations emphasized. The projects considered fall under
  the general heading of Measurement Circuits:

  Oscillograph study of direct and alternating transients.
  Alternating Bridges.
  Non-sinusoidal wave analysis.
  Balance methods of current measurements.
  Phase sequence indicators and meters.
  Problems of power measurement in polyphase circuits requiring
    voltage and current transformers.

  _Text: Nims, “Advanced Circuits Measurements Manual”._


EE 46 Electron Tube Circuits. Prerequisites, EE 35, EE 45.

  A continuation of EE 45, dealing principally with the
  following topics:

  Direct measurements of Tube Constants.
  Essentials of Amplifier Circuits of all types.
  Oscillator and Inverter Circuits.
  Rectifier and Relay Circuits.

  _Texts: Everitt, “Communication Engineering”; Nims,
  “Advanced Circuits Measurements Manual”._


EE 47 (EE 47-1, 47-2) Electrical Design. Prerequisites, EE 22, EE 33.

  The performance characteristic of electric equipment depend
  upon the materials of which it is made, and upon the
  arrangement and dimensions of these parts. In this course
  this relationship for simple equipment, such as resistors
  and magnets, is studied mainly by computation methods. Some
  time is taken here for the layout of machinery locations
  on the floors of a building, which gives some practice in
  the use of surveying instruments. The quantitative study of
  materials and their arrangement in electric machinery is
  carried further into the windings of direct and alternating
  current machinery, including transformers if time is
  available.

  _Texts: Nims, “Electric Machine Design Notes”; Busse,
  “Surveying Notes”._


EE 71 Electricity.

  This is the general course adapted to the needs of chemical
  and mechanical engineering students.

  It is a lecture, recitation and problem course in the
  fundamental units and their application to the electric
  circuits and machines.

  The topics are as follows: Magnetism, induction, electric
  current, pressure and resistance, electric power and
  energy; electric, magnetic and electro-static circuits;
  single and polyphase alternating current circuits by
  graphical, analytical and complex quantity methods.

  _Texts: Dawes, “Electrical Engineering”, Vol. I; Dawes,
  “Electrical Engineering”, Vol. II; McKone, Laboratory
  Manual “Applied Electricity”._


EE 75 Electricity.

  This is a general survey course adapted to civil
  engineers. It is not followed by laboratory experience.
  It treats the fundamental units and their application to
  electric circuits and electric machinery, both direct and
  alternating current. It is made as broad as possible for
  these students who have but limited time to give to the
  subject.

  _Text: Timbie, “Elements of Electricity”._


EE 81 Applied Electricity. Prerequisite, EE 71.

  This is the electric machinery course for mechanical
  engineering students. It offers experience in the wiring,
  measurement and operation of the usual direct and
  alternating current machines. The proper application of
  these machines in industry is treated.

  The classroom work is supplemented by a machine laboratory
  course.

  _Texts: Dawes, “Electrical Engineering”, Vols. I & II;
  McKone, Laboratory Manual “Applied Electricity”._


EE 83 Applied Electricity. Prerequisite, EE 71.

  This is the electric machinery course for chemical
  engineering students. It is similar to EE 81 except that it
  requires but one semester and therefore is much abridged.

  _Texts: Dawes, “Electrical Engineering”, Vols. I & II;
  McKone, Laboratory Manual “Applied Electricity”._




DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRIAL CHEMISTRY

  Professor V. T. Stewart
  Assoc. Prof. J. A. Bradley
  Assoc. Prof. P. M. Giesy
  Asst. Prof. J. Joffe
  Asst. Prof. A. S. Kohler
  Mr. F. W. Bauder
  Mr. S. J. Baum
  Mr. M. Frederick
  Mr. G. C. Keeffe
  Mr. L. Z. Pollara
  Mr. S. N. Sadoff
  Mr. T. J. Tully
  Dr. A. S. Williams


The four year course in Industrial Chemistry is broad in scope and is
designed to give the student a thorough background in the fundamental
sciences, engineering subjects, and the necessary cultural subjects. It
forms an adequate basis for advanced courses of a professional nature
in science and engineering and, by further training, in the methods of
scientific research.

The earlier part of the course provides the essential foundations of
mathematics, physics, and chemistry. Later comes thorough drill in the
assimilation, acquirement of facility of application, and blending of
the more theoretical instruction of the earlier years.

To give the student a sound grasp of the subject matter, problems of
various types form an important part of the curriculum. The laboratory
work is almost exclusively quantitative. The student is required to
record observations and to express experimental data in an orderly and
precise manner.

Incidental to the formal instruction are such matters as the use of
library, methods of finding all that is known of a particular product
or process, and the writing of reports.

Courses of a cultural nature constitute an important part of the
curriculum. Their purpose is to develop in the young technical worker
an intelligent approach to contacts with his fellow workers and to
responsibilities of a broader social nature. Like all technical men,
the chemist may become a business executive, in which event some
breadth of vision may be of the utmost importance to him.


The Chemistry Laboratories

These laboratories are located on the top floor of the Laboratory
Building, the laboratories being two in number. The large laboratory
is devoted to courses in General Chemistry and Qualitative Analysis,
and the smaller one to more advanced work in analysis and to organic
chemistry. There is also a balance room and a stock room, both easily
accessible to the two laboratories.

The department possesses the material equipment necessary for work in
inorganic, organic, analytical and industrial chemistry. Fume closets
are installed in both laboratories for the proper handling of processes
involving harmful fumes. A continuous supply of distilled water is
furnished by an enclosed still. A parsons generator supplies hydrogen
sulfide for the work in qualitative analysis.

Among the various special pieces of apparatus are the following: A Parr
calorimeter, a centrifuge, conductivity apparatus, mechanical grinder,
pumps for the production of compressed air and suction, various special
pieces of apparatus for distillation and filtration and for the
handling of gases.


The Chemical Engineering Laboratory

The Chemical Engineering Laboratory is arranged for the study of unit
operations by the students of the chemical course. The apparatus is
commercial equipment of modern design, which has been equipped with
numerous meters, gauges and measuring devices for accurately testing
the machines. The students make quantitative studies of factory
operations and of the problems involved in the design of equipment.
The unit operations studied include heat transfer, fluid flow,
distillation, evaporation, drying, etc.

A copper, forced-convection, vacuum evaporator, having a capacity of
one thousand pounds of water per hour is available. This machine is so
equipped that accurate heat and material balances may be obtained and
operation costs calculated as in commercial practice.

A very flexible apparatus is the copper experimental distillation unit,
which is 23 feet high. This consists of a 50-gallon kettle, a 19-plate
rectifying column, condensers, cooler and an automatic decanter and
feed control. Five of the sections of the column are of Pyrex glass, so
the actual operation can be carefully studied. It can be operated on
several modifications of batch, steam or continuous distillation.

The batch drier, equipped with automatic temperature and humidity
control, is arranged for the study of the drying process as it is
carried out in commercial practice.

A rotary suction drum filter, Sweetland, plate and frame, and stoneware
suction filter are used in experiments on filtration.

Experiments on grinding include a study of a Ball Mill, Jaw Crusher,
Micro pulverizer, and an Attrition Mill.

The laboratory is also equipped with a centrifuge, sulfonator, vacuum
crystallizer, autoclave and other pieces of equipment, such as
pyrometers, necessary for experimental runs on the various units.




INDUSTRIAL CHEMISTRY COURSE, B.S. (CH.)

Courses offered to students entering September 1937 and later.


FIRST YEAR (Given in 1939-1940)


First Semester

                                                Attendance  Hours
                      SUBJECT                       Rec.    Lab.
 CH       11   Chemistry                             3       3
 ME        1   Engineering Drawing                   1       3
 Eng      10   English                               4       0
 Eng      50   History of Industrial Civilization    1       0
 Ind E    11   Principles of Engineering
                 (The College)                       2       0
 Math      1   Mathematics                           3       3
 Phys      1   Introductory Problems in Physics      0       3


 Second Semester

 CH       11   Chemistry                             3       3
 ME        1   Engineering Drawing                   1       3
 Eng      10   English                               4       0
 Eng      50   History of Industrial Civilization    1       0
 Ind E    11   Principles of Engineering
                 (The College)                       2       0
 Math      1   Mathematics                           2       2
 Phys      1   Introductory Problems in Physics      0       2
 Phys      2   Physics                               2       3


 SECOND YEAR (Given in 1939-1940)


 First Semester

 CH       21   Qualitative Analysis                  1       3
 CH       22   Inorganic Chemistry                   2       0
 EE       71   Electricity                           3       0
 ME        2   Engineering Drawing                   0       2
 Eng      20   English                               3       0
 Eng      60   History of Industrial Civilization    1       0
 Ind E    12   Principles of Engineering
                 (The Industry)                      0       2
 Math     21   Calculus                              3       2
 Phys      3   Physics                               4       0


 Second Semester

 CH       21   Qualitative Analysis                  1       3
 CH       22   Inorganic Chemistry                   2       0
 EE       71   Electricity                           3       0
 ME        2   Engineering Drawing                   0       2
 Eng      20   English                               3       0
 Eng      60   History of Industrial Civilization    1       0
 Ind E    12   Principles of Engineering
                 (The Industry)                      0       2
 Math     21   Calculus                              3       2
 Phys      3   Physics                               2       3


 SUMMER WORK

 Ind E    60   Co-operative Work
                 (required for Honors Option Group).


 THIRD YEAR (Given in 1939-1940)


 First Semester

 CH       31   Physical Chemistry                    2       0
 CH       32   Quantitative Analysis                 3       6
 CH       33   Thermodynamics                        2       0
 EE       83   Applied Electricity                   3       3
 Ind E    13   Staff Control                         0       2
 Math[14] 31   Differential Equations                3       0
 Mech     24   Mechanics                             4       0


 Second Semester

 CH       31   Physical Chemistry                    3       0
 CH       32   Quantitative Analysis                 2       6
 CH       33   Thermodynamics                        2       0
 Ind E    13   Staff Control                         2       0
 Ind E    31   Economics                             3       0
 Math[15] 32   Vector Analysis                       3       0
 Mech     24   Mechanics                             4       1


 SUMMER WORK

 Ind E    61   Co-operative Work
                 (required for Honors Option Group).


 FOURTH YEAR


 First Semester

 CH       41   Physical Chemistry                    3       0
 CH       42   Organic Chemistry                     3       3
 CH       43   Industrial Chemistry                  1       3
 CH[16]   44   Unit Operations                       0       3
 ME       55   Mechanical Engineering                3       0
 Ind E    14   Staff Control                         1       2
 Ind E    22   Industrial Management                 3       0
 Phys     30   Strength of Materials                 3       3


 Second Semester

 CH       41   Physical Chemistry                    3       0
 CH       42   Organic Chemistry                     3       3
 CH       43   Industrial Chemistry                  1       0
 CH[16]   44   Unit Operations                       0       3
 ME       16   Machine Design                        3       0
 ME       55   Mechanical Engineering                0       3
 Ind E    14   Staff Control                         1       2
 Ind E    41   Accounting                            3       0
 Ind E    51   Business Law                          1       0
 Phys     30   Strength of Materials                 3       0

Note: Students who wish to reduce the amount of work per semester in
Freshman and Sophomore subjects may apply to the Dean for a regular
five year schedule.

[14] Math 31 is optional but recommended for students who contemplate
graduate work.

[15] Math 32 is optional but recommended for students who contemplate
graduate work.

[16] CH 44 is optional for Senior students.




CHEMICAL ENGINEERING COURSE, B.S. (CH.E.)

Offered in academic year 1939-40 to students who completed Junior
requirements before September 1939


FOURTH YEAR


First Semester

                                                Attendance  Hours
                  SUBJECT                           Rec.    Lab.
 CH       41   Physical Chemistry                    3       0
 CH       42   Organic Chemistry                     4       6
 CH       46   Chemical Engineering                  2       6
 ME       16   Machine Design                        3       0
 Ind E    14   Staff Control                         1       2
 Ind E    22   Industrial Management                 3       0
 Ind E    51   Business Law                          1       0
               Co-operative Industrial Work.


 Second Semester

 CH       41   Physical Chemistry                    3       0
 CH       42   Organic Chemistry                     4       6
 CH       46   Chemical Engineering                  2       6
 ME       16   Machine Design                        3       0
 Ind E    14   Staff Control                         1       2
 Ind E    22   Industrial Management                 3       0
 Ind E    51   Business Law                          1       0
               Co-operative Industrial Work.


SUBJECTS OF INSTRUCTION in the DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRIAL CHEMISTRY

CH 11 General Chemistry.

  Descriptive inorganic chemistry, chemical theory, and
  elementary applied chemistry. Besides a study of the
  chemistry of the elements and their compounds, the
  course includes a brief survey of certain of the more
  important industrial processes, such as the manufacture
  of the elementary gases, the acids, soda, glass, cement,
  and metals. The laboratory work is chosen so as to
  illustrate the current lectures. In order to emphasize the
  quantitative nature of the science, the student is required
  to solve a large number of numerical problems based on
  chemical processes and to do a certain amount of actual
  quantitative work in the laboratory.

  _Texts: McPherson and Henderson, “A Course in General
  Chemistry”; McPherson, Henderson and Evans, “Laboratory
  Manual in General Chemistry”; Bradley, “Problems in General
  Chemistry”._

CH 21 Qualitative Analysis.

  _For Chemical Students._ This course includes the analysis
  of numerous unknowns for both the anions and the cations.
  Class work covers the practical and theoretical aspects
  of analysis, including the theory of electrolytes, ionic
  equilibrium and the law of mass action.

  _Text: McAlpine and Soule, “Qualitative Chemical Analysis”._

  _For Civil Students._ Laboratory work, the same as CH 21.
  Class work consists of the chemistry of materials used in
  engineering work, chemical theory and special topics.

  _Texts: Leighou, “Chemistry of Engineering Materials”;
  Cornog & Vosburgh, “Introductory Qualitative Analysis”._

  _For Electrical and Mechanical Students._ This course is
  designed to acquaint the students with the methods of
  analysis and the application of chemical principles to
  engineering work. Laboratory work consists of qualitative
  analysis, and water and fuel analysis. Class work includes
  the application of chemical theory and such special topics
  as alloys, fuels, corrosion and the treatment of water for
  industrial and sanitary purposes.

  _Texts: Chapin, “Second Year College Chemistry”; Cornog &
  Vosburgh, “Introductory Qualitative Analysis”._

CH 22 Advanced Inorganic Chemistry.

  This course undertakes a more thorough treatment of the
  modern developments of inorganic chemistry than is possible
  in course CH 11. Such topics as the mass law, vapor
  pressure, dissociation, velocity of reaction, and kinetic
  theory are studied in considerable detail. Attention is
  also given to the recent ideas of the structure of the
  atom. The course is profusely illustrated by problems.

  _Texts: Chapin, “Second Year College Chemistry”; Hougen and
  Watson, “Industrial Chemical Calculations”._

CH 31 Physical Chemistry. Junior Year.

CH 41 Physical Chemistry. Senior Year.

  These two courses form a continuous treatment, the
  subject matter of which is selected with a more especial
  view to the needs of students entering the chemical
  industries than is usual in this subject. The abstract
  principles of chemistry are developed in such a way as
  to emphasize their practical importance, and to lead the
  student to facility and confidence in the application of
  theoretical knowledge to his everyday work. A large part
  of the work consists to the solution of problems by the
  students. The problems are discussed in detail, the aim
  being to develop the power to use principles, rather than
  merely to impart factual knowledge of the phenomena. The
  topics considered in the course are the pressure-volume
  relations of gases, the properties of solutions related
  to molal composition, the conduction of electricity
  in solutions, the ionic theory, the mass-action law
  applied to the rate and equilibrium of chemical changes,
  heterogeneous equilibrium from the phase-rule standpoint,
  thermo-chemistry and thermo-dynamic chemistry. Under
  the latter topic are considered the free-energy change
  attending chemical reactions, the maximum work obtainable
  from them, the effect of temperature on free-energy and
  a number of applied topics in electro-chemistry such as
  electro-motive force of voltaic cells, electrode potentials
  in relation to the equilibrium of oxidation and reduction
  reactions, electrolysis in relation to electromotive force
  and concentration, and gas polarization. Throughout the
  two courses, the scientific background of the chemical
  industries is constantly impressed upon the student. Only
  by constantly applying the principles to concrete problems
  will the student acquire such a knowledge and the power to
  use it in new cases.

  _Text: Getman and Daniels, “Outline of Theoretical
  Chemistry” (for CH 31 and CH 41)._

CH 32 Quantitative Analysis.

  This course includes both the theory and the practice of
  quantitative analysis. In the laboratory, training is given
  in the correct technique of quantitative work, first in
  volumetric and then in gravimetric determinations. Later,
  extended analyses are carried out. In the classroom the
  principles underlying the laboratory work are studied;
  additional methods also are considered. Throughout the
  year the student receives training in the calculations of
  analytical chemistry, with special attention to the errors
  of measurement. Particular consideration is given to the
  accuracy of the methods studied, in connection with the
  requirements of their use, and to the saving of time by
  proper planning of work and choice of method.

  _Texts: Kolthoff and Sandell, “Textbook of Quantitative
  Inorganic Analysis”; Giesy, “Problems in Quantitative
  Analysis”._

CH 33 Thermodynamics.

  This follows the lines of course ME 31 Thermodynamics but
  is adapted to the needs of industrial chemists.

  _Text: Lichty, “Thermodynamics”._

CH 41 Physical Chemistry.

  (See CH 31.)

CH 42 Organic Chemistry. Prerequisites, CH 11, CH 31, CH 32.

  This is a course in the principles and practices of
  organic chemistry. In the lectures and recitations a
  systematic study of the aliphatic and aromatic compounds is
  undertaken. In the laboratory certain selected experiments
  in the analysis and synthesis of organic compounds is
  carried out as well as exercises in the study of the
  chemical properties of various classes of compounds.
  The course is conducted with special reference to the
  industrial applications of organic chemistry. Some of
  the newer physico-chemical tools used in the study of
  the science will be considered. If time permits, certain
  special topics such as dye-stuffs, alkaloids, and compounds
  of biochemical importance will be studied.

  _Texts: Conant, “The Chemistry of Organic Compounds”;
  Coghill and Sturtevant, “Organic Compounds”._

CH 43 Industrial Chemistry.

  The class work includes a study of industrial equipment
  and processes. Safety work in the chemical industry is
  given particular consideration. The laboratory work
  covers typical operations and processes of manufacturing
  chemistry, which are carried out in small scale commercial
  equipment.

  _Text: Riegel, “Industrial Chemistry”._

CH 44 Unit Operations.

  This is an introductory course in the unit operations of
  chemical engineering, the purpose of which is to introduce
  the student to the use of large scale chemical equipment.

CH 46 Chemical Engineering.

  The class work consists of a study of industrial equipment
  and processes. Safety work in the chemical industry is
  given particular emphasis. The laboratory work comprises
  a study of unit operations and processes. Seminars, which
  include reports on the laboratory work and articles in the
  technical literature, are held at regular intervals. A
  portion of the time is devoted to surveying as applied to
  the chemical plant. This includes work in measurements for
  equipment foundations, piping, etc. The laboratory work
  includes evaporation, drying, filtration, distillation,
  etc. Particular stress is laid on the quantitative aspects
  and interpretation of the data.

  _Texts: Perry, “Chemical Engineers’ Handbook”; Walker,
  Lewis, McAdams & Gilliland, “Principles of Chemical
  Engineering”; Kohler, “Laboratory Manual in Chemical
  Engineering”; Busse, “Shop Surveying Notes”._




DEPARTMENT OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERING

  Professor F. D. Carvin
  Assoc. Prof. H. E. Walter
  Asst. Prof. F. J. Burns
  Asst. Prof. D. E. Davis
  Asst. Prof. P. E. Schweizer
  Mr. H. R. Booth
  Mr. B. Eskin
  Mr. K. A. MacFadyen
  Mr. D. F. Oliver
  Mr. J. L. Polaner
  Mr. H. E. Purdy
  Mr. A. Reminger, Jr.
  Mr. E. W. Wraith, Jr.
  Mr. D. E. Zeliff


The Mechanical Engineer is concerned with the problems of design,
construction and operation of machine tools, of the power machinery
to operate these tools and of power machinery in general, such as
refrigeration, ventilation, automotive, hydraulic and heat transfer
machines. He is greatly concerned with the problems of industrial
management and public affairs in general. The subject matter covered by
this department has been developed with these points in mind.

The first two years of the course develop a background of mathematics,
physics, chemistry and English upon which the technical subjects of
the last two years depend. An introduction to the technical phase of
the work is had in this period through such subjects as engineering
drawing, shop work and electricity. A practical view-point may be
developed by work in industry during the summers.

In the third year, the student is introduced to the several basic
courses in engineering such as thermodynamics, heat power, hydraulics,
strength of materials, machine design and electricity. A knowledge of
the problems of our social and industrial life is obtained by a study
of economics, staff control and business law.

The student’s time in the fourth year, is divided between strictly
technical work in college and an attempt to co-ordinate with this the
cooperative industrial work in industry. In this manner, the practical
side of his profession is emphasized. The technical work in school
consists of applying the principles developed in the previous year
to definite engineering problems. This is done by a study of power
plants, turbines, internal combustion engines, heating and ventilation
and structural design. In the laboratories, tests are made on various
machines to determine their operating characteristics; fuels and
lubricating oils are examined; materials are studied both from the
machine tool view-point and their heat treatment and metallurgical
properties. The economic side of the question is further emphasized by
courses in management and staff control.

Students who have satisfactorily completed the first three years of
work in mechanical engineering may choose the aeronautical option
courses in the fourth year. In this course, some of the more general
subjects in mechanical engineering are replaced by more specialized
instruction in aeronautics.

Arrangements may be made whereby students of aeronautical subjects,
who wish to enroll in the aircraft mechanics course at the Casey Jones
School in Newark or in flying courses at the various fields, will
receive credit in their co-operative work for such time spent in these
courses. This work may be taken during the summer or during the regular
co-operative period. The cost of such courses must be carried by the
student; it is not included in the regular college fees.

The student branch of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers
holds eight to ten meetings a year at the college. All students in the
department are expected to attend these meetings.


Engineering Drawing

The aim in Engineering Drawing is to so train all the students of the
engineering departments that they will be able to write, to read, and
to understand the universal language of Engineering Drawing.

The work is designed as training for engineers, not draftsmen,
therefore an attempt has been made to eliminate copy work as such, and
to place stress upon an understanding of what is being done and of the
reasons for doing it that way.

The ability to make good freehand sketches rapidly, easily and
accurately is an asset to any engineer. Much time and attention is,
therefore, devoted to sketching. An engineer must, also, be able to
inspect a drawing and know whether or not it is well drawn, accurate
and complete, so training is given in checking drawings.

The work is so planned that opportunities for the exercise of planning,
judgment and initiative are given to each student.

Every student is urged to set for himself a high standard in each of
the following items:


1. Accuracy--accuracy is a necessity.

Exactness, completeness, and fitness are of the utmost importance in
the work of an engineer. A working drawing, no matter how pleasing
its appearance, is worthless if the dimensions on it are incorrect,
if important dimensions and notes are lacking, or if a job completed
according to instructions on it will not function properly. Drawings
lacking in accuracy are not acceptable.


2. Appearance--a good appearance is a predisposing factor.

The appearance of a drawing depends upon a few simple and easily
mastered elements.

 _Balance_:     No crowding, no great open spaces.
 _Proportion_:  Of letters to views--of views to the size of
                  the drawing.
 _Line Work_:   Clear-cut and uniform.
 _Lettering_:   Well formed and well proportioned.
                  Poorly lettered drawings are not acceptable.
 _Cleanliness_: Keep hands and tools clean.


3. Speed--Time is the essence of the contract.

Speed depends upon understanding, planning, mastering of technique and
most of all upon concentration.


The Mechanical Engineering Laboratories

The Mechanical Engineering Laboratory is designed to meet the general
purposes of testing and studying machines and materials. It consists of
several distinct sections devoted to the special phases of experimental
engineering. These sections are as follows: steam, internal combustion
engines, flow of fluids, hydraulics, fuels and oils, metallurgy and
heat treatment, and machine tools.

The steam division of the laboratory consists of a steam boiler,
simple, automatic and compound engines, low speed and high speed
turbines, jet and surface condensers, feedwater heater, pumps, weighing
tanks, meters and calorimeters. Each machine is equipped with apparatus
for measuring quantities conforming with the A. S. M. E. test codes.

The internal combustion engine section includes Diesel engines, a gas
engine, Diesel and gasoline automotive engines and water and air cooled
airplane engines. Each test engine is connected to a dynamometer.
Instruments are provided for making the necessary measurements called
for in standard testing. Several engines are used for study purposes.

The flow of fluids laboratory makes provisions for the study of the
flow characteristics of steam, air and liquids. Instruments used in
measuring the flow of fluids are examined and tested. Steam nozzles
and orifices are attached to a condenser for steam flow tests. A
forced draft fan and a two-stage air compressor provide air for the
investigation of the flow in ducts, nozzles, orifices and general air
machines. A small wind-tunnel permits the examination of air flow
around small models. The loss of head in pipes, fittings and valves can
be tested.

The hydraulic division contains centrifugal and reciprocating pumps, an
open flow channel, weirs, nozzles, orifices, weighing tanks and meters.
Hydraulic machines are tested. The friction loss in pipes and fittings
is examined.

The fuel and oil section of the laboratory is equipped to make the
various standard test of these materials. This includes calorimeters,
viscosimeters, flash and fire point testers, distillation outfit
and flue-gas analysis equipment. A lubarometer is used to test the
coefficient of friction of lubricating oils and to study the effects of
various bearing metals.

The metallographic and heat treatment laboratories are equipped with
gas and electric furnaces, each with temperature measuring instruments,
for the melting and heat treatment of metals. Microscopes, both visual
and photographic, are used for the examination of metal structures.
Grinding and polishing machines are provided for the preparation of
specimens.

The machine tool section of the laboratory is equipped with lathes,
milling machines, shapers, grinders, gas welding outfit and the usual
small tools required for metal cutting. While the major part of the
machine shop instruction is given in connection with the co-operative
industrial work, this laboratory is used to demonstrate shop practice
and machine tool methods in general.

The test work in the Mechanical Engineering Laboratory is designed to
familiarize the student with the construction details, features of
operation, methods of control and the comparative merits of the various
machines. The student is taught to operate these machines in the safest
possible manner and test them along the lines adopted by the various
professional engineering societies.




MECHANICAL ENGINEERING COURSE, B.S. (M.E.)

Courses offered to students entering September 1937 and later.


FIRST YEAR (Given in 1939-1940)


First Semester

                                                 Attendance  Hours
                 SUBJECT                              Rec.   Lab.
 CH       11  Chemistry                                3      3
 ME        1  Engineering Drawing                      1      3
 Eng      10  English                                  4      0
 Eng      50  History of Industrial Civilization       1      0
 Ind E    11  Principles of Engineering
                (The College)                          2      0
 Math      1  Mathematics                              3      3
 Phys      1  Introductory Problems in Physics         0      3


 Second Semester

 CH       11  Chemistry                                3      3
 ME        1  Engineering Drawing                      1      3
 Eng      10  English                                  4      0
 Eng      50  History of Industrial Civilization       1      0
 Ind E    11  Principles of Engineering
                (The College)                          2      0
 Math      1  Mathematics                              2      2
 Phys      1  Introductory Problems in Physics         0      2
 Phys      2  Physics                                  2      3


 SECOND YEAR (Given in 1939-1940)


 First Semester

 CH       21  Qualitative Analysis                     1      3
 EE       71  Electricity                              3      0
 ME        2  Engineering Drawing                      0      2
 ME        7  Shop Practice                            0      3
 Eng      20  English                                  3      0
 Eng      60  History of Industrial Civilization       1      0
 Ind E    12  Principles of Engineering
                (The Industry)                         0      2
 Math     21  Calculus                                 3      2
 Mech     20  Mechanics                                2      0
 Phys      3  Physics                                  4      0


 Second Semester

 CH       21  Qualitative Analysis                     1      3
 EE       71  Electricity                              3      0
 ME        2  Engineering Drawing                      0      2
 Eng      20  English                                  3      0
 Eng      60  History of Industrial Civilization       1      0
 Ind E    12  Principles of Engineering
                (The Industry)                         0      2
 Math     21  Calculus                                 3      2
 Mech     20  Mechanics                                2      0
 Phys      3  Physics                                  2      3


 SUMMER WORK

 Ind E  60   Co-operative Work
               (required for Honors Option Group).


 THIRD YEAR (Given in 1939-1940)


 First Semester

 EE       81  Applied Electricity                      3      3
 ME       10  Mechanisms                               3      0
 ME       30  Thermodynamics                           4      0
 Ind E    13  Staff Control                            0      2
 Ind E    31  Economics                                3      0
 Math[17] 31  Differential Equations                   3      0
 Mech     23  Mechanics                                2      1
 Phys     30  Strength of Materials                    3      3


 Second Semester

 CE       41  Hydraulics                               3      0
 EE       81  Applied Electricity                      3      3
 ME       10  Mechanisms                               3      0
 ME       34  Heat Power                               3      3
 Ind E    13  Staff Control                            2      0
 Math[18] 32  Vector Analysis                          3      0
 Mech     23  Mechanics                                2      1
 Phys     30  Strength of Materials                    3      0


 SUMMER WORK

 Ind E    61  Co-operative Work
                (required for Honors Option Group).


 FOURTH YEAR

 GENERAL MECHANICAL OPTION


 First Semester

 ME       14  Machine Design                           3       3
 ME       20  Physical Metallurgy                      3       0
 ME       37  Applied Heat Power                       3       0
 ME       50  Mechanical Laboratory                    1       3
 Ind E    14  Staff Control                            1       2
 Ind E    21  Industrial Management                    3       0
 Ind E    41  Accounting                               3       0


 Second Semester

 ME       14  Machine Design                           3       3
 ME       18  Graphics & Structural Design             3       3
 ME       22  Metallography                            0       3
 ME       36  Power Plants                             3       0
 ME       50  Mechanical Laboratory                    0       3
 Ind E    14  Staff Control                            1       2
 Ind E    21  Industrial Management                    2       0
 Ind E    51  Business Law                             1       0

  Note: Students who wish to reduce the amount of work per
  semester in Freshman and Sophomore subjects may apply to
  the Dean for a regular five year schedule.

[17] Math 31 is optional but recommended for students who contemplate
graduate work.

[18] Math 32 is optional but recommended for students who contemplate
graduate work.


FOURTH YEAR

AERONAUTICAL OPTION


First Semester

                                                Attendance  Hours
                      SUBJECT                        Rec.    Lab.
ME        14  Machine Design                          3       3
ME        20  Physical Metallurgy                     3       0
ME        90  General Aeronautics                     3       6
Ind E     14  Staff Control                           1       2
Ind E     21  Industrial Management                   3       0
Ind E     41  Accounting                              3       0


Second Semester

ME        14  Machine Design                          3       3
ME        22  Metallography                           0       3
ME        91  Airplane Structure                      3       6
ME        92  Airplane Engines                        2       1
Ind E     14  Staff Control                           1       2
Ind E     21  Industrial Management                   2       0
Ind E     51  Business Law                            1       0




MECHANICAL ENGINEERING COURSE, B.S. (M.E.)

Offered in academic year 1939-40 to students who completed Junior
requirements before September 1939


FOURTH YEAR

GENERAL MECHANICAL OPTION


First Semester

                                                Attendance  Hours
                      SUBJECT                       Rec.     Lab.
ME        18  Graphics & Structural Design            3       3
ME        22  Metallography                           0       3
ME        36  Power Plants                            3       0
ME        37  Applied Heat Power                      3       0
ME        50  Mechanical Laboratory                   1       6
Ind E     14  Staff Control                           1       2
Ind E     21  Industrial Management                   5       0
Ind E     51  Business Law                            1       0
              Co-operative Industrial Work


Second Semester

ME        18  Graphics & Structural Design            3       3
ME        22  Metallography                           0       3
ME        36  Power Plants                            3       0
ME        37  Applied Heat Power                      3       0
ME        50  Mechanical Laboratory                   1       6
Ind E     14  Staff Control                           1       2
Ind E     21  Industrial Management                   5       0
Ind E     51  Business Law                            1       0
              Co-operative Industrial Work


SUBJECTS OF INSTRUCTION in the DEPARTMENT OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERING

ME 1 Engineering Drawing and Descriptive Geometry.

  The objective of this course is the development of the
  students’ ability and judgment in the field of engineering
  drawing. The work of the course is based upon case studies
  accompanied by short informal lectures upon modern
  commercial practice and upon the theory on which such
  practice is based. Emphasis is placed on speed, accuracy,
  neatness and on the techniques by which these are obtained.

  The course includes study of and practice in lettering,
  line work, projection, conventions, tracing, sketching,
  shop standards, the use of notes, the reading of blue
  prints, the reading of layout drawings, pictorial
  representation, developments, and checking as applied to
  commercial engineering drawing.

  _Text: Freshman Engineering Drawing Notes._

ME 2 Engineering Drawing. Prerequisite ME 1.

  The principles laid down in the previous year’s work are
  applied to a series of problems in structural drafting,
  concrete work, gear drawing developments, and welded steel
  work. Such additional work in descriptive geometry as is
  necessary for each drawing is given as the work develops.
  An opportunity is given to learn modern drafting practice,
  the way a drafting room is managed, and to develop the
  basis for future courses in design and engineering.

  _Text: Sophomore Engineering Drawing Notes._

ME 7 Shop Practice.

  A course for sophomore mechanical students, given in two
  parts.

  Part 1--Surveying and Machine Layout. Three hours a week
  for half a semester are devoted to laboratory work in
  machine layout. This includes surveys of existing equipment
  and exercises in establishing lines and elevations for
  setting machines and equipment.

  Part 2--Machine Tools. Three hours a week for half a
  semester are devoted to a laboratory course in machine tool
  practice. Experiments are carried out in the machine shop
  and visits are made to industrial shops.

  _Text: Busse, “Surveying Notes”; “Shop Notes”, Turner,
  “Machine Tool Work”._

ME 10 Mechanisms. Prerequisites Math 21, Mech 20.

  This course is essentially one of preparation for the
  succeeding work in machine design. It includes the study of
  links, bands and contact motion; of gears and gear teeth,
  epicyclic trains and cams. The recitations and lectures are
  supplemented by work in the drafting room where numerous
  problems are solved graphically.

  _Text: Schwamb, Merrill and James, “Elements of
  Mechanisms”._

ME 14 Machine Design. Prerequisites, ME 2, ME 10 and concurrent with
Phys 30.

  A course for senior mechanical engineering students.
  This course continues the work of the previous year in
  Mechanisms. It is outlined to place emphasis on the
  strength as well as the motion of machine elements and
  their final assembly into the complete machine. The
  theory of the graphic solutions of problems is developed
  and applied to the analysis of the stress in machines,
  including the effects of friction. Both theoretical and
  empirical methods are applied to the design of machines.
  Its purpose is to instruct students to attack problems in
  a direct and orderly manner. Three hours of lectures and
  recitations and three hours of drafting room work per week
  throughout the year.

  _Text: Faires, “Design of Machine Elements”, Fairman and
  Cutshall, “Graphic Statics”._

ME 16 Machine Design. Prerequisite, ME 2 and Concurrent with Phys 30.

  A course in design for non-mechanical students. This course
  is subdivided into two parts. Part one deals with general
  design and is further divided into two sub-groups. The
  first part of this sub-group deals with what is commonly
  called Mechanisms and the second part deals with subject
  matter which is usually associated with Machine Design
  courses which should lead to the ability to proportion
  parts of machine elements. Part two is for the purpose of
  making the student acquainted with materials and their
  characteristics through microscopic examination. In this
  part of the work the student is required to examine not
  only steels but non-ferrous materials such as brasses and
  alloys of aluminum as well. This information coupled with
  that given in Course Phys 30 should acquaint the student
  with materials from any points of view and should make him
  conscious of the important part played by materials in
  design work.

  _Text: Hyland and Kommers, “Machine Design”._

ME 18 Graphics and Structural Design. Prerequisite, Phys 30.

  The theory of graphic statics is developed. It is then
  applied to beams, columns, roof trusses, cranes, etc. The
  theory of re-enforced concrete is studied. Design problems
  on conveyers, foundations, cranes, chimneys and walls are
  worked out. A classroom and drafting room course for senior
  mechanical engineering students.

  _Text: Opdyke and Schweizer, “Graphic and Structural Design
  Notes”._


ME 20 Physical Metallurgy. Prerequisite, CH 11.

  This course deals with the study of metals by means
  of microscopic examination. The subject is introduced
  by a discussion which aims to define a metal. This is
  followed by an explanation of metallic properties and the
  distinction between metals, non-metals, and metalloids. The
  standard equilibrium diagrams for binary alloys are then
  studied and include the liquid to solid and the solid to
  solid transformations that take place. This is followed
  by a detailed study of the iron, iron-carbon diagram. The
  effect on the microscopic structure due to the addition
  of a third element such as nickel, manganese, chromium,
  vanadium, tungsten, etc., is then studied.

  The equilibrium diagrams of the copper-zinc and aluminum
  copper are then studied in detail.

  In addition to these discussions the student is required
  to prepare for microscopic examination and to take
  photo-micrographs of such materials as cast iron, cold
  rolled steel, carbon steels, standard S. A. E. Steels such
  as nickel, nickel-chromium and molybdenum steels, brasses
  and aluminum alloys, etc.

  _Text: Van Wert, “Introduction to Physical Metallurgy”,
  Woldman, “Physical Metallurgy”, “Metallurgy Laboratory
  Manual”._

ME 22 Metallography. Prerequisite, ME 20.

  This course consists of three hours a week of work in the
  Metallographic Laboratory. The subject matter includes
  the determination of critical points; calibration of
  thermo-couples; study of gas and electric heat treating
  furnaces, and the effect of heat treatment on steels,
  brasses and alloys of aluminum. The student is required
  to prepare specimens for microscopic examination to study
  them under the microscope and photograph them in order
  to determine whether or not he has secured the required
  structures in heat treatment. The change in such physical
  properties as hardness is also studied. This course
  emphasizes the fact that microscopic examination is a
  valuable adjunct rather than a purely laboratory procedure.

  _Text: Woldman, “Physical Metallurgy”._

ME 30 Thermodynamics. Prerequisites, Math 21, Phys 3.

  A Junior Course for mechanical engineering students. The
  thermodynamic theory of gases and vapors is studied with
  respect to both source of energy and the methods of making
  it available. The subject matter includes a study of energy
  and its availability; the properties of gases and vapors;
  energy changes during expansions and compressions; the
  various ideal cycles for converting heat into work; and the
  general theory of the flow of fluids. A lecture, recitation
  and problem course.

  _Text: Barnard, Ellenwood, Hirshfeld, “Heat Power
  Engineering”, Vol. 1; Keenan and Keys, “Steam Tables”._

ME 31 Thermodynamics. Prerequisites, Math 21, Phys 3.

  A Junior Course for non-mechanical engineering students.
  The thermodynamic theory of gases and vapors is studied
  with respect to both source of energy and the methods
  of making it available. The subject matter includes the
  properties of gases and vapors; energy changes during
  expansions and compressions; and the various ideal cycles
  for converting heat into work. A recitation and problem
  course.

  _Text: Faires, “Elementary Thermodynamics”; Keenan and
  Keys, “Steam Tables”._

ME 34 Heat Power. Prerequisite, ME 30.

  This course consists of applying the principles of
  thermodynamics to heat power problems. The subject matter
  covered includes combustion, heat transfer, steam engine
  principles, air compressors, air engines and refrigeration.
  The laboratory work includes fuel and oil testing and
  studies and tests of instruments and apparatus used in heat
  power engineering and the flow of fluids.

  _Texts: Barnard, Ellenwood, Hirshfeld, “Heat Power
  Engineering”, Vol. 1, 2, 3; Shoop and Tuve, “Mechanical
  Engineering Practice”. Department Notes._

ME 36 Power Plants. Prerequisite, ME 34.

  A course for senior mechanical engineering students. The
  subject matter consists of a study of modern practice in
  steam power plants and heating and ventilation systems.
  Boilers, feedwater heaters, condensers and other plant
  auxiliaries are studied. The economics of power generation
  is discussed. Individual problems are assigned on power
  plants design and on heating and ventilation systems.

  _Text: Barnard, Ellenwood, Hirshfeld, “Heat Power
  Engineering”, Vol. 2, 3; Severns, “Heating, Ventilation and
  Air Conditioning Fundamentals”._


ME 37 Applied Heat Power Engineering. Prerequisite, ME 30.

  A course for senior mechanical engineering students given
  in two parts.

  Part 1--Steam Turbines. Three hours a week for one semester
  are devoted to a thermodynamic study of turbines. Various
  types of turbines are examined; nozzle design problems are
  solved; velocity diagrams for impulse and reaction turbines
  are developed, and the characteristics and design features
  of turbines in general are studied.

  Part 2--Internal Combustion Engines. Three hours a week for
  one semester are devoted to a study of internal combustion
  engines, including gas, gasoline and Diesel engines.
  The various air standard cycles are studied. Ignition,
  carburetors and injection mechanisms are discussed. The
  design features of the various engine parts are considered.
  Attention is paid to the cooling and lubrication systems.

  _Text: Barnard, Ellenwood and Hirshfeld, “Heat Power
  Engineering”, Vol. 1 and 2._

ME 50 Mechanical Laboratory. Prerequisite, ME 34.

  A course for senior mechanical engineering students. The
  course consists of one hour of lecture and six hours of
  work in the experimental laboratory. Studies and tests are
  conducted on steam engines, turbines, condensers, boilers,
  gasoline and Diesel engines and hydraulic equipment. Air
  compressors and refrigeration units are examined and
  tested; the flow of fluids is studied; oils and fuels are
  tested.

  _Texts: Shoop and Tuve, “Mechanical Engineering Practice”;
  Department Laboratory Manual._

ME 55 Mechanical Engineering. Prerequisite, ME 31.

  This course in heat power engineering is for students in
  chemical, civil and electrical engineering. Classroom
  theory is correlated with practice in the laboratory.

  Part 1. Heat Power Engineering. Three hours a week of
  lectures, discussion and problems in applied thermodynamics
  and heat engines. The course covers study of fuels,
  combustion, boilers, feedwater, heat transfer steam engines
  and turbines, pumps, internal combustion engines, air
  compressors, and refrigeration.

  Part 2. Mechanical Laboratory. Three hours a week. The
  experimental work in the laboratory includes test on steam
  engines and turbines; gasoline and diesel engines, pumps,
  and hydraulic equipment; fuel calorimetry and exhaust gas
  analysis.

  _Texts: Craig and Anderson, “Steam Power and Internal
  Combustion Engines”; Shoop and Tuve, “Mechanical
  Engineering Practice”; Laboratory Notes._

ME 90 General Aeronautics.

  Recitations, lectures and trips to airports. Fundamental
  principles of aeronautics including a study of stability
  and control of airplanes. Description of modern aircraft.
  Air transportation in its engineering, traffic and economic
  aspects. Airplane maintenance.

ME 91 Airplane Construction.

  Lectures, drafting and laboratory work. Analytical and
  graphical analysis of airplane parts. Materials used in
  airplane construction. Shop methods of construction.

ME 92 Airplane Engines.

  Lectures and laboratory work. A study of airplane engines.
  Thermodynamics of internal combustion engines; mechanical
  design including power, fuel and carburetion. Laboratory
  testing of different types of airplane engines.




DEPARTMENT OF ENGLISH

  Assoc. Prof. P. M. Giesy
  Asst. Prof. F. A. Grammer
  Asst. Prof. L. C. Spry
  Mr. William Arnott
  Mr. F. C. Burt
  Mr. G. A. Valente


The technical work of the engineer requires him to write notes,
letters, and reports in a clear, correct, and concise manner. He must
be able to read both technical and non-technical writing quickly and
accurately. His advancement will depend upon the impression which he
makes upon his superiors. Consequently the spoken English which he uses
in conversation and in meetings will affect his professional progress.
The reading of good literature will help him to understand how
different sorts of people will act and feel under various conditions,
and so will aid him in solving problems involving personal relations.

As the engineer advances in his profession his contacts are more and
more with men who do not have a technical background. With these men
he cannot use scientific language, the terminology and formulas of
chemistry or mathematics. If he is to make himself clear, he must be
able to use the English language in a way which will make his hearers
understand his facts and ideas. If he is to persuade his hearers that
what he advocates is the proper thing to do, he must speak or write so
that they feel that he is a competent, trustworthy man.

During the first two years of his course, the student is trained in
writing, speaking, and reading. The training consists largely in
practice: in writing on assigned subjects, in speaking before a group
of about a hundred, and in reading selections from literature which
have interest to an engineer. Practice in writing and speaking continue
during the last two years of the course: the student prepares and
presents reports in his various professional courses.

Concurrent with the work of the first two years in English is a series
of lectures on the history of industrial civilization. These are
intended to give the student an appreciation of the broader aspects of
engineering development and particularly of its social results. They
also furnish material for the written work of the student in his study
of English.


SUBJECTS OF INSTRUCTION in the DEPARTMENT OF ENGLISH

Eng 10 English.

  The aims of this course are to train the student to express
  ideas in writing and speech, and to read rapidly and
  accurately. He learns to write by writing, by having his
  mistakes pointed out, and by correcting them. He learns to
  speak by speaking before a group of about a hundred, and by
  being criticized by the group and by the instructor.

  (a) Selections from literature which have engineering
      interest are read, some of them being abstracted.
      Translations from foreign classics are included
      with excerpts from English literature.

  (b) Two hours per week are given to the writing of
      themes, based in general on the material gathered
      in (a) and in Course Eng 50. One hour per week
      is spent in class work on the principles of English
      composition, particularly as applied to technical
      writing.

  (c) One hour per week is applied to practice in oral
      English. At first the students read before the
      class themes which they have written; later they
      speak without notes on current topics of engineering
      interest.

  _Texts: Giesy and Arnott, “Technical English Composition”;
  Park, “English Applied in Technical Writing”; Cullimore,
  “Selections for Engineering Students”._


Eng 20 English.

  The work of course Eng 10 is continued throughout the
  second year.

  (a) During the summer preceding this course each student
      is required to read and report on five books of
      general engineering interest. The reading and
      abstracting of literature selections is continued.

  (b) Composition work is continued, two hours per
      week. Some practice is given in the abstracting
      of technical articles, and in the writing and dictation
      of business letters.

  (c) Practice in speaking continues throughout the year.

  _Texts: Giesy and Arnott, “Technical English Composition”;
  Park, “English Applied in Technical Writing”; Cullimore,
  “Selections for Engineering Students”._


Eng 50 History of Industrial Civilization.

  Lectures on the history of civilization from earliest times
  to the Industrial Revolution. Particular attention is paid
  to the developments of science, technology, and industry,
  to the social influences affecting these developments, and
  to their social results.


Eng 60 History of Industrial Civilization.

  A continuation of the lectures of Course Eng 50, through
  the Industrial Revolution and down to the present. Special
  consideration is given to technological unemployment and
  the other social problems connected with the development of
  labor-saving machinery.




DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRIAL ENGINEERING

  Professor J. A. Brooks
  Assoc. Prof. R. Widdop
  Asst. Prof. C. J. Kiernan
  Asst. Prof. G. D. Wilkinson
  Mr. P. L. Cambreling
  Mr. J. C. Hoffman
  Mr. O. J. Sizelove
  Mr. R. I. Vail
  Mr. J. W. Willard


An important function of this department is to test, orient, and guide
the student. Starting in the freshman year the student is advised, by
means of psychological tests, as to his fitness for engineering. Later,
the Staff Control course offers an opportunity to guide the student
in the field of human relationships. Guidance in this field is as
important as it is in engineering study.

Many engineering graduates are entering the fields of manufacturing,
selling, and administration. These men should have not only a knowledge
of the fundamentals of engineering, but also a knowledge of economic
theory, business functions, and human relationships. It is also
believed that a knowledge of these subjects will be beneficial to those
men who remain in the engineering field.

Therefore, in addition to the training in the fundamental principles
of engineering, every student in the Newark College of Engineering
is required to take all of the courses listed in the Department of
Industrial Engineering.

This department serves as a link between industry and the college. It
is responsible for the direction and administration of student work in
industrial plants and organizations. Beginning in the freshman year,
students are interviewed several times to determine their fitness and
their preferences regarding placement in industrial plants. Records of
these interviews are used in placing students in industrial work and in
summer work.

The department arranges for the placement of students in industry and
for the details of working plans or programs for each student. After
the student is placed, contact with the employer is maintained by
frequent visits to the plant. The progress of each student is carefully
supervised, and, in cooperation with a representative of the firms,
records are kept showing the progress of each student throughout the
period of his employment. Students must receive a satisfactory mark in
their industrial work before they are eligible for graduation.

The department seeks to give the student effective individual
_guidance_, a gradual, consistent _orientation_ to his professional
life, and a keen awareness of human relation values of his obligations
as a citizen and a member of society.

The department uses as mediums, certain courses extending over
the college career, established _psychological_ tests, supervised
industrial placement, personal interviews, thorough treatment of Staff
Control, Economics and Management and lectures and group discussions
with men prominent in fields connected with this program.

The department also acts as a link between its graduates and industry.
It conducts a placement bureau for the purpose of helping the graduates
better their employment opportunities.


SUBJECTS OF INSTRUCTION in the DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRIAL ENGINEERING

Ind E 11 Principles of Engineering. (The College).

  An attempt to interpret to the new student the activities
  which go to make up his college experience.

  The various catalogued subjects are discussed and their
  values indicated and explained as an integral part of
  the professional development of an engineer. The why and
  wherefore of the various courses and their objectives are
  discussed with the students so that they may have a clear
  and somewhat definite idea as to the reasons for courses
  and instruction material.

  As the course proceeds extra-curricular activities are
  considered in their relation to the academic values.

  The objective of the course is to give some purposeful
  direction to the activities of the freshman and to
  possibly establish some sense of values inherent in his
  undergraduate work.

  The course consists of a series of two-hour discussion
  periods in subjects carefully and sequentially arranged
  and definitely scheduled. The discussions are led by
  members chosen from the entire staff for their particular
  fitness to explain professional values in terms within the
  students’ experience.

Ind E 12 Principles of Engineering (The Industry).

  A series of discussions centering about personal problems
  having for its object the preparation of the student for
  the required industrial experience to follow his sophomore
  year. Believing that general attitudes, point of view,
  emotional and personality factors are of the greatest
  importance in any common enterprise, the discussions are so
  directed as to clarify some of the common misconceptions
  concerning modern industrial practice as it touches the
  individual.

  A serious attempt is made to induce the student to
  undertake some constructive program of personality and
  character development, to meet the standards required of
  those who can successfully live and work together. While
  the work of the previous year has served to explain the
  internal standards and objectives of the college, this
  continuation of the course explains the aims, objectives
  and values inherent in the great industrial laboratory.

Ind E 13 Staff Control.

  The subject matter of this course includes those factors
  which have to do with human behavior and with human
  relation problems. It deals with the coordination of the
  young engineer with his environment. Particular attention
  is given to the professional, economic, social, emotional
  and moral phases of this correlation.

  In the junior year the students discuss twenty-five to
  thirty books on human relations and subjects which affect
  human behavior. The subject matter of these books, in
  outline form, is presented to the class by the students.

Ind E 14 Staff Control.

  In the senior year the students discuss problems in human
  relations. Many of these problems, which are presented in
  written form by the students, consist of incidents which
  have taken place in the cooperative firms. Therefore
  the cooperative firms may be viewed as human relation
  laboratories, furnishing real and vital problems for the
  students.

  The discussion groups provide an opportunity for the
  students to discuss and analyze these problems which now
  face them; and also problems which may face them later in
  their profession and their every day life.

Ind E 21 Industrial Management.

  This course includes a study of the industrial plant, its
  design, layout, and equipment; organization, production
  control, time and motion study, standardization, cost
  finding and engineering economy studies. The object of the
  course is to present to the students some of the important
  principles underlying modern management methods.

  _Texts: Alford, “Cost and Production Handbook”; Grant,
  “Problems of Engineering Economy”._

Ind E 22 Industrial Management.

  This course is similar to Ind E 21 but is less extensive in
  nature.

  _Text: Kimball, “Principles of Industrial Management”._

Ind E 31 Economics.

  This course in the fundamentals of Economics is presented
  from the business man’s point of view and includes many
  concrete examples and illustrations from the world of
  business. Some of the subjects discussed are economic
  concepts, the nature of production, organization of
  modern business, size of business units, specialization,
  process of exchange, money, business cycles, monopolies,
  international trade, business risks, distribution of income.

  _Text: Bye, “Principles of Economics”._

Ind E 41 Accounting.

  This course is intended to give the engineering student the
  fundamentals of accounting. Only enough general bookkeeping
  and accounting is supplied to make the course practical and
  to provide a proper groundwork. Emphasis is placed on the
  preparation and analysis of statements, the calculation of
  fixed assets, and control features.

  _Text: Reitell and Van Sickle, “Accounting Principles for
  Engineers”._

Ind E 51 Business Law.

  An elementary study of the principles of the Common Law as
  applied to business relations. Students are required to
  study definite parts of the text in preparation for each
  meeting of the class. The class time is divided between
  discussion of the subject matter and written quizzes. The
  subjects given particular attention are: The definition
  of “contract”, and a detailed study of each element of
  the definition; agency; sales; partnerships and (briefly)
  corporations; negotiable instruments; patents, copyrights
  and trade-marks; master and servant; damages; evidence.

  A practicing patent attorney gives special lectures on the
  subject of patents.

  _Text: Harding and Canfield, “Legal and Ethical Phases of
  Engineering”._

Ind E 60 Cooperative Work.

  This is industrial placement offered to selected groups of
  pre-Junior students who have demonstrated their ability,
  and have given some indication that they will capitalize
  the experience.

  The placement is designed to furnish the laboratory
  work for the courses in Staff Control, Management, and
  Economics, and to provide general motivation for the
  professional courses given during the last two years. The
  student gains the experience of adjusting himself to a new
  and usually different environment, learns at first-hand
  some of the factors which affect a young man’s progress in
  industry, and has the opportunity to observe the practical
  application, and the limitations, of some of his academic
  subjects.

  The College maintains close contact with the industrial
  firm and obtains frequent reports on the student’s personal
  qualities. These reports are discussed with the student in
  individual consultations.

Ind E 61 Cooperative Work.

  This work is similar to Ind E 60. It is offered to selected
  groups of pre-Senior students.




DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS

  Professor J. H. Fithian
  Asst. Prof. E. G. Baker
  Mr. E. C. Easton
  Mr. C. Konove
  Mr. P. Mainardi
  Mr. E. M. Squire


Confidence in his ability to solve the mathematical problems which will
confront him in training and practice is a very necessary qualification
for the successful student of engineering. Not only must he be able to
solve these problems, but he must know that his solutions are correct.
The courses in mathematics given to all students during the freshman
and sophomore years aim to provide this confidence.

Emphasis is placed not on acquiring information, but on developing
skill,--skill in analyzing problems and arriving accurately and
efficiently at their solution. Consequently, much time is given to
written work under careful supervision of the instructors. Neatness and
orderly arrangement are stressed, as well as efficiency of methods and
the checking of results.

In the sophomore year the same division of time between classroom
recitations and written exercises is continued. Here the student adds
a powerful tool to his equipment in the theory of the differential and
integral calculus. Applications of the methods studied include many
practical problems from various types of engineering work.

Beside the minimum requirements for completing the courses mentioned
above, a large number of extra problems is included to provide further
training for students of superior ability. For those who plan to go
into fields of research or to continue their studies after graduation,
the Department offers certain advanced courses designed as preparation
for graduate work. These may be elected by upper classmen in addition
to the regular courses.


SUBJECTS OF INSTRUCTION in the DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS

Math 1 Freshman Mathematics.

  In order to enable him to handle accurately and efficiently
  the mathematics of engineering subjects, the student is
  given a thorough training in the analysis and solution of
  problems, and in the performance of numerical calculations,
  including the use of slide-rule and logarithmic methods.

  The following subject matter will be included:

  Plane Trigonometry: review of the solution of right and
  oblique triangles and fundamental trigonometric analysis.

  Geometry: review of the use of mensuration formulas for
  plane and solid figures.

  Algebra: review of fundamental operations, and
  simplification of fractional forms; solution of equations
  and simultaneous equations, linear and quadratic, and
  the approximate solution of equations of higher degree;
  exponents and radicals; complex numbers, variation,
  binominal theorem, and progressions (with applications to
  compound interest and annuities).

  Analytic Geometry: fundamental formulas; general curve
  plotting; equations of the straight line, circle and
  conic sections (with applications); polar coordinates;
  translation and rotation of axes; and an introduction to
  solid analytic geometry.

  _Texts: Oglesby and Cooley, “Plane Trigonometry”; Pettit
  and Luteyn, “College Algebra”; H. B. Phillips, “Analytic
  Geometry”._

Math 21 Calculus. Prerequisite, Math 1.

  Topics include the technique of differentiation; maxima
  and minima, rates, curvature, parametric equations,
  differentials, series, and partial differentiation;
  technique of integration; areas, volumes, lengths,
  surfaces, centroids, moments of inertia, fluid pressure,
  work, multiple integrals, and approximate integration by
  Simpson’s Rule.

  The theory and technique of both differentiation and
  integration are studied during the first term, with a
  few simple applications, mostly geometric in character.
  The second term affords opportunity for many practical
  applications from various fields of engineering. The aim of
  a set of general review problems during the last few weeks
  is to teach not only how to use the methods previously
  studied, but when to use them--i.e., whether the nature
  of a problem suggests an exact analytical solution, or an
  approximate or graphical solution.

  _Texts: Granville-Smith-Longley, “Elements of the
  Differential and Integral Calculus”; N. C. E. “Laboratory
  Manual for a Course in Calculus”._

Math 31, 32.

  Two advanced courses, Differential Equations (first term)
  and Vector Analysis (second term), are optional for Juniors
  in addition to the work of the regular curriculum. No
  attempt will be made to give an exhaustive mathematical
  treatment, but certain parts of these subjects will be
  taught together with other related material necessary for
  the solution of important problems in all branches of
  engineering.

  _Text: Doherty and Keller, “Mathematics of Modern
  Engineering”. Vol I._

  Math 31 Differential Equations. First and second order
  equations of common occurrence; linear differential
  equations of any order with constant coefficients, and
  systems of linear equations; determinants; Fourier series
  and harmonic analysis.

  Math 32 Vector Analysis. Algebra and calculus of vectors;
  line and surface integrals, and potential theory; vector
  operators, and their application to electromagnetic
  theory and the derivation of certain partial differential
  equations of mathematical physics.




DEPARTMENT OF MECHANICS

  Professor B. S. Koshkarian
  Asst. Prof. J. Joffe
  Mr. P. O. Hoffmann


The courses in mechanics are designed to provide the student with
a sound foundation in a subject which occupies a position of basic
importance in all branches of engineering and especially in the
analysis and design of machines and structures.

While some emphasis is placed on routine calculations and development
of formulas, the main objective of the courses is to present general
methods of attack and a scientific point of view. The greatest emphasis
is placed upon the ability to carry on sustained work at reasonably
high levels.

A considerable portion of the time in the courses is devoted to the
solution of problems of a practical nature and largely drawn from the
field of engineering. In connection with these problems stress is laid
on clearness of statement and accuracy of formulation and solution.
The technique and methodology are considered of extreme importance in
undergraduate study.

The recitations are individual as far as possible and are supplemented
by group discussions. It is believed that progressive tests are the
fairest criteria for determining the students’ mastery of the subject.
Written examinations form an essential part of the courses.


SUBJECTS OF INSTRUCTION in the DEPARTMENT OF MECHANICS

Mech 20 Statics. Prerequisites: Math 1, Phys 1, 2.

  The course is designed to provide the prospective engineer
  with a thorough training in the fundamentals of statics,
  which form an indispensable background for the study of
  engineering subjects of a more specialized character. The
  student is acquainted with the underlying assumptions and
  broad general principles of the science and is encouraged
  to apply them in the solution of a great variety of
  problems of practical interest to the engineer.

  The principal topics covered in this course are:
  composition and resolution of forces and couples;
  equilibrium; analysis of simple frameworks; flexible
  cables; the laws of friction with general application and
  special reference to journal, belt and pivot friction, and
  rolling resistance.

  _Texts: Seely and Ensign, “Analytical Mechanics”; Joffe,
  “Problems in Mechanics”._

Mech 21 Kinematics and Kinetics. Prerequisites: Mech 20, Math 21.

  This course treats of the laws governing motions of
  bodies with applications to conditions most frequently
  met in engineering practice. The principal topics covered
  under kinematics are: linear and angular displacement,
  velocity, and acceleration; rectilinear and curvilinear
  motion; motion curves; relative motion; motion of rigid
  bodies; instantaneous center. The principal topics covered
  under kinetics are: Newton’s laws applied to the motion
  of a particle; D’Alembert’s principle; motion of the
  mass-center; translation, rotation and plane motion of a
  rigid body; work, power, energy, impulse, and momentum;
  principles of work and energy, principles of impulse and
  momentum, and their application to special types of motion
  of rigid bodies.

  _Texts: Seely and Ensign, “Analytical Mechanics”; Joffe,
  “Problems in Mechanics”._

Mech 22 Kinematics and Kinetics. Prerequisites: Mech 20, Math 21.

  The general aim and content of this course is the same
  as that of Mechanics 21. Special emphasis is given to
  topics and problems of interest to the civil engineer. The
  work-energy method is used extensively in the solution of
  problems in kinetics.

  _Texts: Seely and Ensign, “Analytical Mechanics”; Joffe,
  “Problems in Mechanics”._


Mech 23 Kinematics and Kinetics. Prerequisites: Mech 20, Math 21.


  The general aim and content of this course is the same as
  that of Mech 21. Special emphasis is given to topics and
  problems of interest to the mechanical engineer. The study
  of relative motion is extended to include Coriolis’ Law.

  _Texts: Seely and Ensign, “Analytical Mechanics”; Joffe,
  “Problems in Mechanics”._

Mech 24 Statics, Kinematics and Kinetics.
  Prerequisites: Math 21, Phys 3.

  It is the aim of this course to acquaint the student of
  engineering with the fundamental laws, principles, and
  methods of mechanics, and to develop in him the ability to
  apply them in the solution of a great variety of problems
  of practical importance to the engineer. The principal
  topics included in this course are:

  Statics--Composition and resolution of forces and couples;
  equilibrium; analysis of simple frameworks; the laws of
  friction with general applications, and special reference
  to journal, belt and pivot friction.

  Kinematics--linear and angular displacement, velocity, and
  acceleration; rectilinear and curvilinear motion; motion
  curves; relative motion; motion of rigid bodies.

  Kinetics--Newton’s laws applied to the motion of
  a particle; D’Alembert’s principle; motion of the
  mass-center; translation, rotation and plane motion of a
  rigid body; work, power, energy, impulse, and momentum;
  principles of work and energy, principles of impulse and
  momentum, and their application to special types of motion
  of rigid bodies.

  _Texts: Seely and Ensign, “Analytical Mechanics”: Joffe,
  “Problems in Mechanics”._




DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS

  Professor F. N. Entwisle
  Assoc. Prof. E. Smith
  Mr. W. Hazell, Jr.
  Mr. P. Nielsen
  Mr. A. Zentgraf


The Department of Physics is in charge of the course in Physics given
to Freshmen and Sophomores, and of the course in Strength of Materials
given to Juniors.

It is the objective of the course in Physics to provide a knowledge
of the fundamentals of the subject and to teach these fundamentals as
prerequisite to later work in professional subjects rather than as
basic principles in a discreet scientific subject. To this end the
engineering aspects of the subject are stressed more than would be the
case in General College Physics.

The schedule of instruction includes a rather small amount of formal
lecturing with a large amount of informal recitation and problem work
together with one afternoon each week spent in Laboratory. Effort is
made to unify the instruction in the class room and in the laboratory.
The work in the latter, which is largely quantitative, is designed to
present fresh problems for the students’ solution as far as possible
rather than to require routine rechecking of known constants.

The course in Strength of Materials is designed to present the
fundamental causes of the strain in material under stress. Effort is
made to present a course which may be of common benefit to each of the
four professional departments in the College. Instruction is carried
out by means of lectures and recitations and one-half day per week
spent in the Laboratory. The laboratory is designed to demonstrate the
theory presented in the class room and thus furnish visual evidence of
the accuracy of theoretical assumptions.


The Physics Laboratory

The Physics Department is supplied with two laboratories, adequately
equipped with standard and special apparatus for quantitative
measurements in elementary mechanics, heat, sound, light, and
electricity. Its furnishings include sensitive physical balances,
acceleration apparatus, coincidence and compound pendulums, Young’s
Modulus and centrifugal force apparatus, force tables, ballistic
pendulums, microscopes, radiation equipment, and specially designed
equipment for obtaining centers of gravity and moments of inertia of
various specimens.

Equipment is at hand for performing standard experiments in heat.
Kundt’s tubes, electric tuning forks and resonance tubes are provided
for experiments in sound. Measurements in light employ diffraction
gratings, prisms, lenses, and mirrors. A first class optical bench with
Lummer-Brodhun head, 30″ sphere photometer, illuminometer, and Weston
Photronic cells are used for illumination measurements. An equipment of
meters, resistance units, Wheatstone bridges, potentiometer sets and
traction permeameter is provided for elementary electrical measurements.


Strength of Materials Laboratory

The Strength of Materials Laboratory has been designed for the purpose
of student instruction. With this in mind, the size of the apparatus
has been kept within moderate limits so that the student may perform
the test. The laboratory is housed in two adjoining rooms. The first
room is equipped with:

  1--100,000 lb Olsen Std. Tension Compression Test Machine.
  1--50,000 lb Machine of the same sort.
  1--50,000 lb hand operated Riehle Tension Compression Machine
     fitted with extra size screw for column work.
  1--5000 lb Riehle Machine.
  2--Punch Presses for shear studies.
  2--Sets of Apparatus for testing Eccentric Riveted Joints.
  1--Gyration Pendulum.
  1--Polarized Light Stress Analyzer.
  1--Torsion Demonstrator.
  1--Slender Column Tester, also

  Brinell Hardness Meter
  Shore Scleroscope
  Portable Brinell Tester

Extensometers, Strain Gauges, Shear Testers, for the above machines.
Torsion Meter, Planimeters, etc.

In the second room the cement and concrete testing appliances have been
concentrated, including:

  1--Riehle Briquette Testing Machine
  Concrete Cylinder Moulds
  Concrete Beam Moulds
  Vicat Needles
  Briquette Moulds, etc.
  Moist Storage Cabinet
  Sand and Gravel Bins
  1--Power Concrete Mixer


SUBJECTS OF INSTRUCTION in the DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS

Phys 1 Introductory Problems in Physics.

  An introductory course to familiarize the student with the
  best methods and procedure in performing calculations in
  Physics. Practice is given in the use of the slide rule,
  logarithms, mathematical and physical tables, construction
  of graphs and curves, co-ordinate and tabular ruled paper.
  Emphasis is placed upon the arrangement of work, efficiency
  of calculations and methods of attack. The question of
  precision is introduced through simple measurements and
  calculations and is emphasized throughout the work of the
  year. A set of problems has been compiled which aims to
  present the elementary principles of physics as basic to
  all engineering problems.

  The work of the second term continues this approach, with
  special emphasis upon the proper preparation of reports in
  Physics. All of this work is done under conditions which
  approximate the environment of the engineering computing
  office.


Phys 2 and Phys 3. General Physics.

  The objective of the courses in General Physics is a
  knowledge of the fundamental laws of physical science,
  visualized as the foundation for later professional
  work. To this end, the courses are administered from the
  Engineering rather than the Scientific viewpoint.

  Phys 2.

    Elementary Mechanics--Linear and curvilinear motion; simple
    force system; energy and power; static forces in fluids;
    simple harmonic motion.

    The laboratory work which accompanies this course is
    entirely quantitative and is designed to aid, by physical
    demonstration the development of the concepts originated
    in the classroom. To this end, the laboratory experimental
    work follows as closely as possible after the classroom
    exercises so that the essential unity of the two may be
    impressed upon the student’s mind. An effort is made to
    develop the student’s capacity for sustained careful
    observation and deduction, and to initiate good practice in
    the matter of recording and reporting upon scientific and
    engineering data. Great stress is placed upon the precision
    of the results obtained in the laboratory.

    _Texts: “Physics”, edited by Duff; Entwisle, “Experiments
    in Mechanics”._

  Phys 3

    Heat, Electricity, Sound and Light.

    Heat. Heat as a form of energy; calorimetry; expansion
    principles; heat transfer; meteorology.

    Electricity. Fundamental principles of electric charge
    and electric current; development of essential mechanical
    nature of electrical and magnetic measurements.

    Sound. Wave motion; propagation; principles of sound
    quality; acoustics of rooms.

    Light. Illumination; photometry; principles of reflection;
    elementary geometrical optics; formation of spectra;
    interference; polarized light.

    Laboratory work is given in the second semester of the
    course and covers a wide range of physical measurement,
    with particular attention given to the accuracy possible
    with the apparatus used.

    _Texts: “Physics”, edited by Duff; Entwisle, “Experiments
    in Heat, Sound, Light and Electricity”; Entwisle, “Elements
    of Sound and Light”._


Phys 30 Strength of Materials. Prerequisites: Math 21, Mech 20.

  The object of a study of Strength of Material is:

  First, to determine the relations between the external
  forces acting on a body and the internal forces or stress
  and between external forces and the deformations or
  strains, so that the stresses may be determined from known
  loads or from measured strains or the strains determined
  from known loads.

  Second, to obtain a knowledge of those properties of
  engineering materials necessary to an understanding of
  these relations.

  Among the topics covered are stress-strain curves,
  properties of engineering materials, thin-walled cylinders,
  riveted joints, combined stresses and strains, torsion,
  statically determinate and statically indeterminate beams,
  shear diagrams, moment diagrams, elastic curves, flexure
  formula, Euler column formula, Gordon-Rankine formula,
  straight line column formula, repeated loads, fatigue of
  metals, impact and energy loads, stresses in flat plates,
  and reinforced concrete beams.

  An introduction to the use of a handbook is accomplished
  by instruction in the A. I. S. C. handbook and by the
  assignment of special problems for solution in class under
  supervision.

  In the laboratory, tests are performed to verify the
  theoretical considerations studied in the classroom work.
  These include a study of testing machines, tension test of
  metal, test of riveted joint, compression tests, Brinell
  hardness, wood tests, strength of cement and mortar,
  concrete in bond and tension, construction and test of a
  reinforced concrete beam, slender column tests, torsion in
  shafts, and stress analysis by means of polarized light.

  _Texts: Frost, “Laboratory Manual”; Seely, “Resistance of
  Materials”; A. I. S. C. Handbook._




Transcriber’s Notes


A number of typographical errors were corrected silently.

Cover image is in the public domain.

Dittoes replaced by the words meant to be duplicated.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NEWARK COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING
BULLETIN, V. 11, NO. 4, DECEMBER 15, 1938 ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
